Our route starts at the south side of Victoria Park, at Bonner Hall Bridge –
best accessed by getting the Tube to Bethnal Green, a ten-minute walk away. The
first portion of this route offers clues about the nature of east London before
the arrival of the Regent’s Canal, taking in several buildings that predate the
waterways, and whose fates were inexorably changed by its arrival. Before moving
on, take a moment to reflect on Victoria Park. In the eighteenth century, this
was all open pasture, interspersed with the odd brick kiln and market garden. The one notable feature
was Bonner Hall, so called after the sixteenth-century bishop of London Edmund
Bonner. All this was to change in the nineteenth century. As London expanded,
calls for public parks grew; in 1840, Queen Victoria was presented with a
petition signed by 30,000 residents. The Crown estate purchased 218 acres in the
area and, over the next few years, converted it into Victoria Park. The park
shares a family resemblance to Regent’s Park at the other end of the Regent’s
Canal – no doubt down to the fact that its designer, James Pennethorne, was a
protégé of none other than John Nash.6 The view south-east from Victoria Park’s
Bonner Gate. When I first knew the park – many years ago – it was a fairly rough
place. In particular the Pavilion Café, a few hundred metres to the east of
Bonner Hall Bridge, was a grisly affair, best avoided unless one wanted to
experience the stark reality of East End cuisine. Now, like many in east London,
it has transformed into one of the best cafés mentioned in this book. It makes a
splendid place to begin the walk if you’re in need of a bite to eat or drink.
For those ready to plunge into Georgian industrial architecture, however, it is
best to walk to the western end of the park and through the canal gate on to the
towpath. Here, one can begin to imagine the feel of the canal in its early days:
the canal side adjoining Victoria Park is used as moorings for barges, mostly
residential, while across the waterway (which, as is usual, has a towpath –
intended for the horses required to tow barges – generally on only one side) are
the gardens of houses. This must be a delightful place to live, especially for
the nautical-minded. Houses soon give way to light industrial buildings of
various dates, many now serving as homes or studios. The decaying Regency charm
of The Oval, now accompanied by two Victorian gasholders. When one crosses under
the bridge carrying Cambridge Heath Road, everything changes. You are thrust
into a splendidly gloomy vista, but one with a moving if modest grandeur.
Immediately west of the road bridge is a series of wide, shallow arches and a
mighty brick pier, presumably all part of a now-lost wharf or small basin that
once ran south of the canal – complete with a small window in the pier
suggesting that this massive piece of brick construction is inhabited. Above
these works, and parallel to the road bridge, rises the metal bulk of the
Victorian railway bridge. The view westwards is enriched by the prospect of a
three-storey stucco-clad Regency villa, embellished with no fewer than three
full-height bows that offer a charming sinuous frontage to the canal. 

And looming over all, to the west of the now sadly decaying villa, are the tall and
stark skeletal structures of a pair of nineteenth-century gasholders. It’s well
worth clambering off the canal here to take a closer look at this threatened
piece of industrial and once ornamental London. Go up the stairs to the east of
the bridges, cross the Cambridge Heath Road/Mare Street bridge to the south side
of the canal and head down the grandly named Corbridge Crescent towards the
villa. Several things now happen, and they are all most rewarding. A narrow
alley – Grove Passage – lurks below the crushing form of the railway viaduct,
and Corbridge Crescent suddenly exposes its early granite setts which, during my
last visit at twilight, glistened with moisture and led to a strange and exotic
world that unfolded around and in front of the Regency villa. This section of
the canal was constructed between 1816 and 1820 and the villa appears to date
from around then. Upon closer inspection, it is – despite mutilations – not in
such bad condition as it first looks. The cornice has gone, and the front door
been butchered, but windows are in reasonable order and a light shines from one.
It’s inhabited, at least in part. To the rear is a large, red-brick wing. A
notice is fixed next to a small door, which offers a flashback to the old East
End: ‘Soup Kitchen … open weekdays 10 to 2, Saturdays 10 to 1, Sundays 11 to 1.’
This marks the end of Corbridge Crescent, which now leads to The Oval – a small
piece of neoclassical town planning that incorporated an elongated circus,
somewhat in the Nash manner of Regent’s Park. What high ambitions these names
evoke. The crumbling villa is the solitary survivor of a crescent, perhaps
ruined by the arrival of the railway. Or it was perhaps the fault of the canal
itself. Crescent and Oval – located just off the Hackney Road – were new
creations in 1820 when the canal arrived but were, in the words of The Buildings
of England, ‘hopelessly compromised’ by the social transformation brought about
by this industrial thoroughfare.7 Today, all that’s left of The Oval is its
form, now defined by a scattering of low and mostly mean twentieth-century
industrial structures and by its central island, still framed by robust granite
kerbs, but no longer planted – just an oval of beaten earth littered with urban
detritus. Only a short distance away, on Hackney Road, there are still
substantial rows of early-nineteenth-century terraces and semi-detached villas.
Such lofty Georgian ambitions stand in stark contrast to the use of The Oval
now. The villa, the land and later buildings that surround it are occupied by
Empress Coaches. Everywhere are coaches, campers and buses of different types
and sizes, being serviced and cleaned. It has its own surreal charm: in the yard
next door, fellows go about their business; one chap with black and shiny hair,
in an outsize jacket, ambles around smoking a cigarette. 

Everything looks like a flashback to the 1950s. This magical, individual and living piece of workaday
London is, of course, under threat. Instead of coaches and oily workshops all is
to be cleared away for a ‘mixed use’ development containing over 500 square
metres of ‘commercial floor space’ and 116 flats. Consent was granted by Tower
Hamlets Council in December 2008. So all this now exists on borrowed time –
indeed demolition might have taken place by the time you visit. This is how
cities die and how character is lost: gradually, stealthily, bit by bit.
Towering over the villa to the west are the pair of gasholders. This portion of
the Regent’s Canal has been home to gasworks since the Georgian period. The
pioneering Imperial Gas Light and Coke Company, which had been founded in 1812
to supply gas to light England’s streets, gained control of the current site of
Haggerston Park in 1821, at a time when the canal was still largely surrounded
by open fields.8 The second decade of the nineteenth century had witnessed an
extraordinary growth in the amount of gas lighting in Britain. In 1812, there
was only one gas company; just fifteen years later, every town with a population
over 10,000 had a gas supply. The resultant change to urban life was enormous –
suddenly, nightfall ceased to represent the end of the day’s work or ambling,
and became a new opportunity for labour and pleasure-seeking. The solitary
survival of a crescent of Regency houses on The Oval. The gasholders on
Corbridge Crescent are somewhat later. They reveal the wonderful way the
mid-nineteenth-century mind – intoxicated by the thrill and pomp of the past –
could, with only a little appropriate ornament, turn even a functional
industrial structure into architecture stamped with the cultural pedigree of
history. The smaller of them has vertical stanchions fashioned as two tiers of
sixteen classical columns – denuded Corinthian over Doric – evidently calculated
to evoke the power and form of the Colosseum in Rome. Interestingly this type of
classically embellished rotunda was pioneered for a now-demolished gasholder
built on this site in 1856; the current smaller one dates from 1865 and was
designed by Joseph Clarke, with the columns cast by the famed Staveley Coal and
Iron Company of Derbyshire, and the neighbouring taller but simpler gasholder
constructed in 1888–9.9 Now, these gasholders no longer inflate and, if a battle
is not waged, are probably not long for this world. Their majestic and
sculptural forms, which make a vital contribution to the scene, are due to be
demolished, despite protestations by the local heritage group the Hackney
Society. Before returning to the canal, cross to the east side of Cambridge
Heath Road and into Vyner Street, running parallel and immediately south of the
waterway. In the early nineteenth century this cobbled thoroughfare was on the
outskirts of a conurbation that sprawled north, up to the area around London
Fields. 

But everything changed with the arrival of the Regent’s Canal. Vyner
Street – at that time called John Street – was cut off from the land to the
north, and began to develop a rather different character.10 Two centuries later
this small street became the unlikely heart of east and north-east London’s
burgeoning art scene. New galleries set up here to show not the established
trends or artists, nor the ‘mainstream’, but an eclectic mix of what was
‘upcoming’ and experimental. But as is the way with such spontaneous eruptions,
the peak is soon passed as corporate interest muscles in. The low rents have now
spiralled up, so the vibrant little art world here has become something of a
victim of its own success. Some of the pioneering galleries have moved on –
mostly west to Fitzrovia – and the art scene of Vyner Street has itself become
part of East End history. Nonetheless, at the time of writing there are still
some galleries worth visiting, especially on the first Thursday evening of the
month when many host events. There are also a few pubs nearby that are more than
decent, and where local artists gather: the Victory in Vyner Street, the 
Hare at 505 Cambridge Heath Road (a modest three-storey mid-nineteenth-century
building that retains much of the atmosphere of a Bethnal Green local) and the
Bistrotheque at 23–27 Wadeson Street. This is a sophisticated bar and restaurant
housed in battered but large-roomed former industrial buildings, which hosts
erudite talks and, famously, outrageously camp cabaret evenings. The
Bistrotheque has been going for some years now, remains popular and seems
ever-expanding, but was initially amazing simply for being here at all, stuck
down a Bethnal Green backstreet and secreted amongst anonymous post-war factory
buildings. When you’ve had your fill of the pleasures of Vyner Street and its
environs, walk back to the north bank of the canal and continue west. After a
short while you come to another bridge, which carries a road leading to Broadway
Market and then to London Fields. This is an old market street that now has two
good pubs – the Dove, and the Cat and Mutton – said to have occupied the site
since 1790.11 Acton’s Lock. The lock-keeper lived in the house on the right
until the 1980s. But when I first explored it twenty-five or so years ago,
Broadway Market was a desolate place. Most of the array of shops – including one
splendid Regency affair – were run-down or closed, sitting alongside a few
old-time cafés, a pie and mash shop, and a couple of rough-looking pubs. All has
now changed, and Broadway Market has become one of the most sophisticated and
popular Saturday markets in London, with its down-at-heel shops and cafés reborn
as exquisite eateries and delicatessens. Back on the towpath, the walk continues
west, and we now get a better sense of how Regent’s Canal would have felt in its
industrial heyday. The first treat comes in the form of a splendid pair of
operational locks which manipulate the water level, allowing barges coming from
the Thames to navigate the higher ground of north London and to pass beneath a
bridge carrying Queensbridge Road. This is Acton’s Lock, so called for William
Lee Acton, on whose land this portion of the canal was built. Until the 1980s,
the lock-keeper’s family lived in the neighbouring cottage. These days, being
generally operated by relaxed holidaymakers who have hired their barges, it is
easy to forget the extraordinary feat of engineering the locks represent. 

One Victorian description of a trip down Regent’s Canal, by the writer and
theatrical producer John Hollingshead, does a good job of reminding us. His
friend tells him how our frail bark, the Stourport, will be admitted into a
deep, narrow, oblong, brick well; and how, as soon as we are in the dreadful
trap, two massive iron-bound timber gates will close behind us in such a manner
that the more the pressure is increased from behind, the tighter will they bind
themselves together. Then he draws a fearfully vivid picture of the two gates in
front of us – a single, slender barrier, that alone opposes the advance of an
ocean – a hundred thousand tons of water forty feet above our heads, fretting to
be at us, like a bear looking down from his pole upon the tender children
outside his pit.12 Such reflections do a good job of conjuring the
nineteenth-century awe at the industry and scale of the waterways. It is
something we are reminded of again by a structure a little further to the west.
After a short stroll we pass below another bridge, this one carrying the
Kingsland Road – the Roman Ermine Street linking London to Lincoln and York –
which runs due north from Shoreditch. Immediately to its west, on the north
side, there is the long and narrow Kingsland Basin – now tranquil but once
bustling with barges loading and unloading. It illustrates how the canal
operated in its prime. Barges were pulled by horse-power to strategically placed
locations such as this – many adjacent to a main road – where goods were
transferred between barge and dray. Very close by a large timber merchant was
located, presumably here because once it received its wares by barge. The south
side of the canal at this point is lined with late-nineteenth and
early-twentieth-century buildings, many rising almost directly from the water
and offering a fine medley of simple functional design – the early ones in
brick, the later in reinforced concrete, or white-rendered blockwork, with large
steel-framed windows. These are typical of the industrial and utilitarian
buildings that, in north-east and east London, grew up along the banks of the
canal. The buildings were served by the canal and confirmed its purpose. But
here industry has long gone and the canal is now no more than a glorious
ornament and place of pleasure. The buildings now mostly contain flats and
artists’ studios and, when I strolled along the canal, on a sunny weekday
afternoon, the activities were more than just the expected. There were, of
course, the dog-walkers, joggers, bikers and oddball fishermen who really could
not have hoped to catch much that was edible. But also an array of ambitious
contemporary architecture and one anonymous industrial-looking building called
Franks House that is, of all things, the store for the British Museum’s
Ethnography Department. Located at 38–56 Orsman Road – parallel to and south of
the canal – the building’s fine art-deco form is revealed, with its striking
strips of glazing and asymmetrically placed corner tower. An early
twentieth-century warehouse on Orsman Road backs on to the canal. 

Back on the north side of the canal, opposite the museum store, is the Barge House
restaurant, created within the ground floor of a recent building that fronts on
to De Beauvoir Crescent. But immediately to the west of it is something that
seems much less but is, in fact, so much more. This is the Towpath Café,
composed of just a couple of holes in the basement wall of the large and bulky
industrial building that rises along the canal. Outside each slit-like hole is
an array of simple chairs, a few tables and perhaps a bowl or two of water to
quench the thirst of passing dogs. It’s the perfect place for a canal-side
walker to grab a coffee, a freshly-pressed fruit juice, a sandwich or cake and –
if the weather is right – a wonderful place to sit. When I first found Towpath I
was hungry and thirsty from a long walk and it really was like coming upon an
oasis. During the past few years it has expanded, and now colonises a wide
stretch of canal-side structures, with lots of exterior seating. The building
that rises high above the café was built as a printworks, but is one no longer,
and eased itself into local legend in the 1960s and 70s by becoming the
powerhouse for that lost generation of erotic magazines filled with scantily
dressed young women. These publications have, of course, been superseded by far
sterner fare. But back when the presses were in full production, the towpath
became the haunt of cavorting and noisy boys who were determined to get the
irritated printers to stone them with bundles of ‘adult’ magazines. The former
printworks is a fine piece of 1930s architecture, with a bow-fronted staircase
tower. On the next portion of the walk, the towpath becomes wider, the feats of
engineering more ambitious. We are, it seems, entering one of the heartlands of
the late-Georgian industrial metropolis. The first sign of the increase in scale
is the brick-arched Whitmore Road bridge. These early canal bridges really are
fine pieces of early-nineteenth-century engineering. They are made in
traditional manner of traditional materials – essentially Roman in inspiration –
and are robust and handsome in their utilitarian simplicity. They also sometimes
have a strikingly if unintended picturesque quality. The gently curving arch of
this bridge frames splendid views along the canal and, because of its generous
width, reflections from the water are able to ripple and dart within its dark
and cavernous interior. The passage within it is dank and echoing: a strange and
alarming underworld through which bikers and pedestrians rush from sunshine to
sunshine. The apparently wider girth of the canal after the bridge is, in fact,
an illusion. The increased sense of space is suggested by the buildings, which
are generally lower and more distant because of the wider path. This sense of
scale and seriousness is reinforced by the mighty Sturt’s Lock a few hundred
metres later, accompanied by a towering former pumping station that once
regulated the water levels of the canal. The industrial feel of this portion of
the walk is reinforced by a stark, functional building just west of the New
North Road bridge, on the south bank. This is the store of the Museum of London.
It is an Aladdin’s cave of wonders, many not simply archived away or stashed in
filing cabinets but displayed splendidly in glass cases. 

In my view some of the museum’s most intriguing objects are kept here, hustled out of the main City
building by showier pieces calculated to appeal to popular taste. Again, as with
the British Museum store, this Eagle Wharf Road repository can be viewed by
appointment, and for some it could be a rewarding termination to this walk. That
would be a shame, for there is yet more to see. Reflections dart and ripple
across the top of Whitmore Road bridge. Take, for example, the group of
nineteenth-century industrial buildings that stand a hundred metres past Sturt’s
Lock. This striking complex was once home to the Regent’s Canal Ironworks – the
foundry of the master ironworker Henry Grissell. Along with his cousin Samuel
Morton Peto, Grissell became one of the leading public-works contractors of the
early nineteenth century – contributing to structures ranging from Nelson’s
Column to Clerkenwell Prison,
and designing ironwork for the gates around Buckingham Palace and the British
Museum. The site, complete with a tall brick chimney, is nearly a sixth of a
mile in length and rises above its own ‘marina’ walkway that offers moorings for
boats and barges. Some years ago the complex was converted into the Holborn
Studios, made up of photographic studios and a pleasant water-side restaurant
and bar called the Commissary. The Studios have long been recognised as an
exemplary piece of regeneration, in which old buildings have been retained and
new life created. Now all is under threat. The owners want to ‘develop’ the site
as flats and ‘commercial space’, which could mean the destruction of some of the
old buildings, the loss of jobs and the closure of the Studios. It all seems
incredible – and very sad. The Holborn Studios is exactly the sort of place that
gives the canal character and creative energy, and is a great example of the
ways in which buildings can change and adapt. This is, in general, a most
sensible approach. Existing buildings represent ‘embedded’ energy that it is a
crime to squander – something that many developers rarely seem to appreciate. As
we contninue west, we begin to approach the final walkable stretch of the
Regent’s Canal. A little further along we come across the long Wenlock Basin,
where ranks of gaily painted barges nestle below a canopy of trees. It’s now
hard to believe that this was ever a working wharf. It was, of course, once
considered a mighty and daunting feat of engineering – and one that very nearly
failed. In 1826, while still being constructed, the dam across the entrance
collapsed, causing the main canal’s water level to drop by 13 inches and halting
traffic on the waterway. The Narrowboat pub viewed from City Road Basin,
shielded from view by the outsized parapets on Wharf Road bridge. The dauntingly
industrial atmosphere these waterways must once have had is proven by another
structure, further to the west. At the Wharf Road bridge, a steep flight of
stairs rises to road level and to a modest early-Victorian pub – the Narrowboat
– which seems to totter at street level on the very edge of the shallow towpath
cutting. But most striking of all are the parapets of the Wharf Road bridge – in
particular, their height. They are far too large to see over. The design is a
reminder that, in the early nineteenth century, the canal was not regarded as an
ornament but as an industrial highway, at best a place of drudgery and at worst
a realm haunted by queer canal folk. 

In the nineteenth-century imagination, these canal-dwellers came to be seen as the lowest and most alien of people –
worthy of pity or even disdain. Take the following description from an 1888
novel Life in the Cut, in which one character describes a ten-year-old child who
lives on a canal boat as ‘dreadful, so dirty, starved and stunted, she scarcely
seemed a child, more like a wicked hobgoblin; though she did not look wicked
either, only wretched and forlorn, nursing another fearful-looking, more uncanny
atom than herself.’13 The canals and their inhabitants, it seems, were to be
greatly feared. Now, of course, precisely the opposite is the case – as
demonstrated by the archly high-end art gallery that we now approach. On Wharf
Road – running parallel and to the west of Wenlock Basin – stands the Victoria
Miro Gallery, located in a nineteenth-century furniture factory. The interior
offers a vast and minimal space reminiscent of warehouse galleries in New York,
but some original elements have been suffered to survive, including a few roof
timbers and worn floorboards. The architect is Trevor Horne, a specialist in
such stripped-back contemporary design, often with retained, although greatly
adapted, old buildings. The garden backing on to the Wenlock Basin was created
by the artist Ian Hamilton Finlay, and the gallery itself houses works by Chris
Ofili, Grayson Perry, the Chapman brothers and Peter Doig. The whole affair
offers a fascinating perspective of the upper-slopes of the London ‘art scene’.
Confident, wealthy and brilliantly contemporary without being overtly brash –
and a million miles from the gritty industrial aesthetic the building originally
possessed. We now approach the final, glorious, industrial crescendo of the
walk. Rejoin the canal towpath and just a few metres west from the bridge is the
stupendous City Road Basin, covering one and a half hectares in area. The waters
here are wide and the view to the south tremendous. Standing on the wide quay
the City seems to open up, with the water of the basin a highway to its heart.
You can see the obelisk spire of the 1730s St Luke’s church on Old Street, the
serrated profile of one of the Barbican towers and – as now with so many
viewpoints in London – the soaring, tapering and somewhat surreal silhouette of
the Shard next to far-distant London Bridge station. Opened in 1820, the City
Road Basin became the heart and soul of the canal in the 1890s. Goods and
materials were offloaded to be dispersed around the surrounding area, and
products loaded for transportation around London and Britain or for export
abroad via the docks to the east. There were flower and timber wharves, coal
depots – even Pickfords, the house-removal company, had a depot here. The
surrounding buildings are varied, nineteenth century and modern, but most are
tough and big-boned. It’s a pleasing place to loiter and contemplate the city,
with the atmosphere of urban industry still present but transformed into
something less grimy and challenging. When I was there one of the barges, moored
nearby on the north towpath, offered home-cooked Slovakian food. An engraving of
City Road Basin from 1828 offers a glimpse of the late-Georgian industrial
metropolis, with St Luke’s Church obelisk towering in the distance. The last
short leg of the walk has a very different character. The waters now move
between streets lined with salubrious early-nineteenth-century terraces, many
with well-planted gardens. The canal-side becomes bucolic, with houses glimpsed
through the rich array of trees. Suddenly we are in a kind of Eden, a splendid
example of the late-Georgian obsession for creating rus in urbe, with stern and
uniform terraces framed and softened by informal clumps of trees and gardens. We
are in the heart of the city but it feels like we are walking through glades and
groves. The canal becomes a place of fantasy, of heavy engineering inspired by
the romance of history. Here the imagination is inflamed by low-arched and
antique-looking bridges – utterly Roman in feel – and by secret bowers, with
their chairs and tables manipulated to ideal positions by the nearby
terrace-dwellers. 

The theatrical entrance to Islington Tunnel, designed by James
Morgan. And then the canal narrows and feeds into a deep, dark tunnel that
carries it for 878 metres below the heights of Islington and the Angel above.
There is no towpath so the walk ends here, in front of the splendid tunnel arch,
designed in heroic style by James Morgan in the visually powerful Baroque manner
of Sir John Vanbrugh. The opening is in a gentle catenary curve – a much
stronger shape than a semicircular arch – and there is a heavy keystone and two
squat and tough-looking Grecian Doric pilasters. It looks like the theatrical
opening to some operatic dungeon. But despite its ornamental appearance, the
tunnel was in its day a great feat of practical engineering. It was built
between 1815–18 by navvies using horse-and manpower and explosives, with the
spoil carried away in wheelbarrows. When the canal opened bargees had to ‘leg’
their boats through the tunnel – in other words, lie on their back and punt the
barges through by pushing with their legs against the tunnel roof. This hideous,
back-breaking work was necessary until a steam tug was installed in 1826 that
heaved barges through in a continuous chain. In other tunnels, legging was
necessary until well into the nineteenth century. John Hollingshead witnessed
the system on another canal in 1860, and described the moment two boats passed.
‘It was necessary to leave off legging, for the boats to pass each other, and
the leggers waited until the last moment when a concussion seemed inevitable,
and then sprang instantaneously, with singular dexterity, on to the sides of
their boats, pulling their narrow platforms up immediately after them,’ he
wrote. It was, in his rendering, a peculiarly beautiful scene. The action of the
light in front of our boat produced a very fantastic shadow of our recumbent
boatman-legger upon the side wall of the tunnel. As his two legs stuck out
horizontally from the edge of the legging-board, treading, one over the other,
against the wall, they threw a shadow of two arms, which seemed to be held by a
thin old man – another shadow of the same substance – bent nearly double at the
stomach, who worked them over and over, as if turning two great mangle-handles
with both hands at the same time.14 The only way to reach the other end of
Islington Tunnel, if not travelling by barge, is to ascend to the street and
continue west overground. That, though, is another walk. For now, merely take a
moment to look back east and reflect on the extraordinary achievement of the
late-Georgian waterways, and the way they transformed the British economy. It
was a feat that contemporaries were highly conscious of. The English poet and
essayist Anna Laetitia Barbauld captured the optimism of the canal age in a 1773
poem, ‘The Invitation’, which reflects on the remarkable changes that the
waterways had brought to the English landscape: Here smooth canals, across th’
extended plain, Stretch their long arms, to join the distant main: The sons of
toil with many a weary stroke Scoop the hard bosom of the solid rock … The
traveller with pleasing wonder sees The white sail gleaming thro’ the dusky
trees; And views the alter’d landscape with surprise, And doubts the magic
scenes which round him rise.
