Two centuries of English history: looking south through the Royal Hospital from
the Thames.  THE WALK How best to arrive in Greenwich? The options are many. The
Docklands Light Railway takes you into the very heart of the town, but you can
also get off at the Isle of Dogs, contemplate the prospect of Greenwich from the
north bank of the Thames, and then go beneath the Thames in a pedestrian tunnel
that brings you on to the Greenwich riverside. It's best, though, to arrive by
water. When approaching on one of the 'river taxis' - such as the Monsoon
Clipper that sails from Westminster, London Bridge or Tower Hill - the majestic
Royal Hospital gradually comes into view, offering a vision of the magisterial
worldly power the kings and queens of England once held.  Before entering the
hospital proper, walk along the Thames-side promenade to the east. At the centre
of the Royal Hospital court, directly opposite the Queen's House, are some steps
that, when the tide is low, lead down to the beach. This foreshore can offer
some extraordinary insights into the long history of Greenwich and the Thames.
The river here has been a highway for centuries, so many ancient artefacts that
were jettisoned or lost by passing vessels continue to be washed up or
uncovered. Most is trash - fragments of discarded clay pipes, or fragments of
glass - but, of course, old trash can be most revealing. Yet even more exciting
is the subtle evidence of the Tudor palace that once stood here. Look at the
bricks and tiles closely, particularly those you find at the western part of the
foreshore. The bricks are thin and red in colour, and the tile fragments are
thick and glazed a strong yellow with green or black flecks. These are
demolition waste from the Tudor palace, and are part of floor surfaces upon
which Henry VIII or Queen Elizabeth could have walked. Look and touch, but you
must leave the bricks and tiles where you find them, for others to discover and
enjoy. After all, such fragments have little meaning or significance when
wrenched out of their historic setting.  From the top of the steps, look south
to the Royal Hospital. The first building to visit, immediately to the west,
includes the King Charles Block - the only part of Charles II's planned new
palace that was built.  This structure tells us a great deal about shifting
tastes in the middle of the seventeenth century.  In some respects, the design
echoes those Webb and lones had produced for the unbuilt Whitehall Palace. But,
in its boldly detailed and richly textured elevation, it had moved with the
times and reflects the Baroque spirit sweeping Europe in the later seventeenth
century. Here this spirit is expressed by the rustication that covers the entire
facade and by the huge triple keystones above the windows, sym-bolising
strength. These ornamental and somewhat theatrical treatments are typically
Baroque. Palatial quality is given to this monumental design by the central
pediment and columns and the treatment of each end as a pilaster-clad pavilion,
given extra height by the addition of an attic storey.  The west elevation of
Queen Anne block, built in the early-eighteenth century in imitation of John
Webb's King Charles Block opposite.  In Charles II's planned palace, the King
Charles Block was to have been faced by a matching block to form a large court
with its axis aligned with that of the Queen's House. But, of course, nothing
else of Charles's palace was ever built. Instead, the development of the site
stalled for twenty years, until the creation of the Royal Hospital.  The history
is revealed by the courtyard of which the King Charles Block forms the west
range. The range opposite it, of matching design and known as Queen Anne Block,
was constructed between 1699 and 1730. Together they define a generous riverside
court that plays a key role in the slowly evolving Royal Hospital. Here
architectural uniformitv and svm-metry was all-important, which means that
earlier styles were - when necessary - echoed in new work, as is the case with
these two facing blocks, started thirty-five years apart. Viewed from the north
this harmonious courtyard frames a vista through the palace that focuses on the
Oueen's House and the rising landscape to its south. The overall effect, in its
scenic power, is stunning. Also note the way in which the narrow riverside
elevation of Webb's King Charles Block has been extended to the west (in fact in
1712), and then the extended version duplicated in the river elevation of Queen
Anne Block. The object, of course, was to give the hospital a strong and
commanding elevation to the river, but one that takes its cue from Webb's
existing building and that probably echoes his intentions. The story is complex,
but the point is that what was eventually built works brilliantly. This is
thoughtful and inventively pragmatic architecture at its best.  But this is no
more than what one would expect from the architect in guestion. For the man
responsible for realising the Royal Hospital was none other than Christopher
Wren. who had honed his architectural genius by designing St Paul's Cathedral
and the City churches - often in most difficult and demanding
circumstances (see Walk 4). When Wren got to work in 1694, he and his team of
designers - including his protégé Nicholas Hawksmoor - sought not just to
realise Webb's idea for a mighty riverside court by duplicating the King Charles
Block, but also to follow his plan for a linking range to the south. This
southern range was to stand between the Queen's House and the Thames.  But all
was not well. Mary seems to have intervened.  Records are murky but it is likely
that she did not want her grandmother's emblematic house - essentially the
pioneering architectural monument to the Stuart dynasty - to be concealed from
the view of those plying the great highway of the Thames, or the prospect of the
Thames hidden by those using the house. So the south range - in Wren and
Hawksmoor's version large in scale, domed and pedimented - was abandoned and the
extraordinary idea was born that the palatial almshouse should be in two parts,
each broadly a mirror image of the other, with the space between the parts
forming a broad avenue or linear garden allowing views to and from the Queen's
House.  So involved was Mary in this design that Hawksmoor would later recollect
that she was the 'real foundress' of the hospital, and that its architectural
glory was the result of 'her Majesty's fix't intention for Magnifi-cence.  The
resulting complex is remarkable, and often in the most peculiar ways. The grand
open space in the middle works tremendously well. Indeed, it has often been
noted that the spaces within the Roval Hospital - the courts, the avenue, the
colonnades - are almost as spatially and architecturally rewarding as the
buildings themselves. This is all very much in the spirit of Baroque
architecture, where spaces are designed to have a dynamic, surprising and
illusionary - often theatrical - character, when architectural 'scenes' are
framed by columns or arches that play with perceptions of space. Take the
narrowing of the central avenue as you pass south through the hospital. When the
composition is viewed from the river, a somewhat false perspective suggests to
the eye that the avenue is longer than it is and that the Queen's House is more
distant.  While Wren's approach to the Thames-side buildings was determined by
the existing architectural style of the King Charles Block, elsewhere he was
able to be more inventive. This becomes apparent in the domed and colonnaded
buildings to the south. These two structures - King William Block to the west,
and Oueen Mary Block to the east - were under construction by 1698 and, of
course, purpose-designed for hospital use. They display the hand of Wren most
forcefully, with their long lines of columns and the pair of domes - placed with
scenic brilliance - that mark the locations of the two main interiors. And what
interiors they are. The chapel, within Queen Mary Block, and the great hall,
within King William Block, are among the glories of the hospital. The interior
of the chapel was created, following a fire, between 1779 and 1789 to the
designs of James Stuart and is an exquisite, erudite and pioneering essay in
neoclassical architecture. The hall has a stunning Baroque painted interior,
packed with allegory, symbolism and historical references, created from 1708 to
1725 by the painter James Thornhill. And the way the two parts sit opposite one
another can be seen as a division between the spiritual and temporal aspects of
the hospital: between ministering to the old sailors' souls and keeping them in
good spirits. When standing between the domes, astride the Royal Hospital's main axis, all
feels most uniform and harmonious. Just around the corner, however, everything
changes. The west side of King William Block could be described either as deeply
mannered or simply as wild. This elevation was likely the work of Hawksmoor:
while there is no proof of his involve-ment, it is hard to imagine any other
architect at the time being capable of such an odd and wilful design (John
Vanbrugh, who we will meet in a moment, perhaps - but he only become involved
with Greenwich after this structure was complete). The range, completed in 1702,
is designed as a unified palace front, with the emphasis on its centre and the
end pavilions. In striking contrast to the other buildings of the hospital, this
elevation is made of brick, with stone used only for main architectural elements
and as ornament. In the centre is a Doric portico, with closely spaced columns,
rising four storeys from ground level, to support an entablature and an attic
wall. The conceit might have been to evoke the feel of a Roman triumphal arch
or, more probably, a Roman city gate.  In the very centre of this unusual
elevation is a strange detail that has puzzled me for years. Above the main door
are slabs of stone, plain-faced but with slightly recessed margins. It could be
that these were intended to be carved, but the work was never completed. Yet I
wonder if their meaning is rather more mystic. They look like the stones that
face the retaining wall of the Temple Mount in Jerusalem, on which Solomon's
Temple once rose. Hawksmoor was obsessed with history, especially 'primitive'
Christianity and its sacred sites and buildings. Was Hawksmoor trying to link
the hospital at Greenwich with the emblematic and inspirational Temple of
Solomon? If so, this is a fascinating example of the myriad meanings read into
Solomon's Temple during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The Stuart
monarchs saw it as a model for palaces for kings who claimed to rule by divine
right, while others - like Hawksmoor - would have viewed it as a source of
beauty that represented the origin of architecture.  Designed by God, the
temple, in its parts and propor. tions, offered inspirational clues to the
manner in which the absolute beauty of God's creation could be echoed in the
architecture of man. Today, the hospital has a worldlier feel. You will notice
that the grounds are no longer populated by old sailors. The Roval Hospital
closed as a maritime almshouse in 1869, becoming in 1873 the core of the Royal
Naval College, which itself closed in 1998.  It is now overseen by a charitable
foundation, with the buildings housing various academic institutions including
the University of Greenwich and the Trinity Laban Conservatoire of Music and
Dance. The result is that it is now generally accessible to the public - a fact
that still remains faintly surprising to those of us who knew the buildings
before 1998, when much of the hospital was guarded by Ministry of Defence
security men and was out of bounds to casual explorers.  Head south-west from
Hawksmoor's Roman arch and exit the grounds of the hospital, crossing over the
road and walking on to the lawns of the Queen's House. As you walk east, and
pass in front of the house, take in its charmingly Renaissance character.  It is
hard, today, to imagine
that this was the architecture of absolutism.  Inigo Jones had been to Italy, in
around 1605 and again in 1613-14, and studied the works of leading architects
including the great sixteenth-century Venetian architect Andrea Palladio (see
pp. 185-6).  Upon his return from Italy Jones was appointed Surveyor to the
King's Works (probably due to the queen's influence because he had worked
successfully for her brother, King Christian IV of Denmark), and in 1616 was
commissioned to design the Queen's House.  Here the consequences of his Italian
journeys are most clear. It is an incredibly competent evocation of northern
Italy in central London. In many ways, the house is little more than an erudite
copy of a foreign architecture - even its odd H-shaped plan, with a bridge-like
central range straddling a road, is taken from Giuliano da Sangallo's Villa
Medici at Poggio a Caiano which, dating from the 1480s, seems in many ways the
model Jones took as his main inspiration.  But imagine how alien it would have
been to Londoners then, when the Queen's House would have been set amongst the
still largely Gothic vernacular architecture -wrought of timber, brick and
plaster - that would have dominated the city.
As with Palladio's villas, at the Queen's House externally all is simplicity and
symmetry. Beauty comes from the restrained use of classical detail and from
harmonically related proportions that unite all parts - from window openings and
the areas of wall between windows to floor plan. In his I Quattro Libri
del'Architettura of 1570 Palladio offered seven ideal proportions, mostly
generated from the square or cube, including the square and a half proportion
(2:3) and the double square (2:1). Jones applied this theory with vigour. The
overall proportion of the Queen's House is square - although in two parts each
side of the road - and most of its rooms are square or double-square in plan,
including the sublime double-height and galleried cubical hall, one of the
finest and most influential Renaissance rooms created in Britain.  From the
Queen's House, walk east along the south edge of the Royal Hospital, and then
north, along Park Row. We now encounter fewer grand royal buildings, and more
modest architecture - structures that reveal
a different side to the history of Greenwich. In the seventeenth and eighteenth
centuries streets like this would have contained the homes of the residents of
this tranquil Thames-side village.  If it's lunchtime or early evening when you
leave the hospital, then the first stop must be the Trafalgar Tavern at the
north end of Park Row, which marks the eastern edge of the complex. The Tavern
rises directly from the Thames and is a splendid affair, faced with stucco and
ornamented with a pair of large and very generously glazed bay windows and
cast-iron balconies of elegant neoclassical design. It was built in 1837 and its
architect was Joseph Kay, an important man in England's late-Georgian and
early-Victorian building world. This pub is not without fame. It won renown for
being one of the first places within easy reach of London to serve whitebait
(the fry of fish such as sprat and herring) when the season started, and was
evidently well known to Charles Dickens who used it as the location for a
wedding breakfast described in Our Mutual Friend. But the Tavern closed in 1915,
when it served as a refuge for aged sailors, and then became a working men's
club, only reopening in 1965. The physical changes that occurred during this
half-century of non-tavern use, combined with the standard taste of current pub
companies - generally open-plan, with bland pastiche detailing - mean that,
sadly, the interior of the Tavern does not quite live up to the promise of its
verv fine exterior. It does. how-ever, still serve very good whitebait.  Head
south along Park Row and turn east imme. diately behind the Trafalgar Tavern.
This is Crane Street. It is narrow, paved, and takes you past another and far
more discreet public house called the Yacht Tavern and a terrace of mid-to
late-nineteenth-cen-tury cottages, until you get to High Bridge, which is the
location of the Trinity Hospital. Like the Royal Hospital this was an almshouse-
one of manv such institutions built to accommodate aged, decayed or generally
impoverished members of a guild, trade or profession or, as in this case, worthy
but beset residents of a parish. According to an engraving above the door, the
Trinity Hospital was for retired gentlemen of Greenwich' - those who had become
poor by 'casual means', mind, and not through their own 'dissolute life. The
almshouse is a remarkable survival, and is significantly older than it looks.
The face it presents to the world is a pleasing if somewhat meagre expression of
the earlv-nineteenth-century Gothic Revival, with the stucco elevations probably
dating from around 1812. But in fact it was founded in 1613 (not 1616, as
proclaimed on its facade) by the Earl of Northampton. and was run bv the
Mercers' Company from 1621. A considerable amount of early fabric survives,
although much is concealed from the casual observer. If the main door facing the
river is open (which sadly is not often the case), take a look at the
cloister-like central court around which the ranges of dwellings, hall and
chapel are arranged. It is generously planted, and embellished with a fine
ancient mulberry tree said to date to the seventeenth century. Central courts
like this are typical of larger almshouses and reveal that the roots of this
kind of building, with its charitable, communal and often religious function,
lie in the monastic architectural tradition
If you manage to find your way into the chapel make sure you see the very fine
early-sixteenth-century Flemish-made stained glass - the acquisition of which
shows admirable taste on the part of the Trinity - which depicts the 'Agony in
the Garden', the Crucifixion and the Ascension. The window perhaps offers an
alternative meaning to the name of the almshouse. The Trinity of the Father, the
Son and the Holy Ghost is, of course, central to Christian theology; but the
stained-glass's depiction of the three crucial scenes from the tale of Christ -
betrayal, death, and resurrection - offer another take on the word Trinity.
Just east of Trinity Hospital is Ballast Quay. Its south side consists of small,
mainly early-nineteenth-century terrace houses -two retaining delightful Regency
balconies, complete with timber decorations.  And to their west are a couple of
intriguing late-sev-enteenth-century houses and the Cutty Sark public house
(until 1951 the Union Tavern) which is the main architectural accent of the
street. Formed by a pair of very modest houses, also early nineteenth cen-tury,
the pub sports a truly splendid three-window-wide bay window of curved form that
rises to the second storey. Even more so than the Trafalgar, the interior fails
to live un to the promise of the exterior: between the exposed internal
brickwork. the faux panelling on the walls, the crazy-paved floor and the vast
and vulgar staircase, any sense of authenticity is destroved. Nonetheless, if
you sit outside on a fair day, with a pint of Young's bitter in your hand and
with the exterior of the pub in your sights, you surely will be happy enough
These davs. the Cuttv Sark pub cowers beneath the stunted towers of the gaunt
early-twentieth-century Greenwich Power Station From the riverfront look back at
its pair of spectacular turbine halls, each gabled and lit by a huge, arched,
Roman-style 'ther-mal' window. If this power station ever becomes redundant and
these halls opened to the public, then they will become one of the most
magnificent interiors on the Thames. For now, though, walk south along Hoskins
Street, beside the eastern side of the building, before crossing Trafalgar Road
and continuing along Maze Hill until you come to its corner with Park Vista.
Park Vista is, in many ways, one of the most charming and least known of
Greenwich's many characterful historic roads. Much of the south side is formed
by a wall, part of which screens a house called The Chantry that incorporates a
brick-built Tudor outbuilding, once part of Placentia. Opposite is yet one more
early public house - the Plume of Feathers -which claims a foundation date of
1691, making it the oldest still-functioning pub in Greenwich, with its origin
as a tavern for those who made a living ushering livestock down the old drovers'
road (now Romney Road) connecting Kent with south London and the City.  Even
more striking are buildings constructed in the eighteenth century. East of the
pub is a charming medley of Georgian houses, with a number of distinctive
features. One short terrace has a plaque proclaiming it to be 'Park Place and
bearing the date 1791 - meaning that it makes remarkably early use of
first-floor relieving arches, which take the weight off the windows below. A few
houses to the east is the 'Manor House', also five windows wide but set back
slightly from the street behind a small front garden. Its brickwork details,
flat-headed windows, the overhanging cornice and the simple doorcase suggest a
construction date no later than 1718. Particularly characterful is the gazebo on
the roof, from which prospects of the river and the park could have been
enjoyed.  Our route. however, is up the slope to the south.  This is Maze Hill,
which marks the east edge of Greenwich Park, with the west side of the road
formed by park railings and wall. On the west side of the street is a terrace of
1807 that originally served as an infir-mary, the Royal Naval Asylum School,
which in the early nineteenth century occupied the Queen's House.  This terrace
was the work of Daniel Asher Alexander, an architect and engineer of remarkable
abilitv and a pioneer of sparelv detailed and utilitarian neoclassical design -
every ornament with a practical function or distinct purpose - particularly
known for his dock-land architecture. This Maze Hill terrace is quintessential
Alexander, representing his ability to reinvent what is essentially traditional
street architecture.  Take the severe-looking elevation that faces Maze Hill,
beautifully wrought of pale brick, in which the space between ground-and
first-floor windows bestows a strange nobility on the composition by hinting at
unusually lofty ground-floor rooms.  The most remarkable building on this part
of the street is still to come. Continue south a short distance and you arrive
at the most interesting - if not most beautiful - piece of domestic street
architecture in Greenwich. Vanbrugh Castle, on the corner of Westcombe Park
Road, was designed in 1718 by the idiosyncratic - indeed in many ways maverick
-architect Sir John Vanbrugh, now best known for his work on Blenheim Palace,
Oxfordshire, and Castle Howard, Yorkshire. These are both designed in Vanbrugh's
inventive, vigorous and sculptural Eng. lish Baroque style: a style developed
and refined by Nicholas Hawksmoor, who had worked for Vanbrugh.  Vanbrugh
acquired 12 acres of land in and around the park and designed and built a series
of odd and characterful houses for members of his family. This house. which
Vanbrugh built for himself, is the only one to survive.  Although famed for his
Baroque classical country-house architecture, Vanbrugh preferred, when it came
to creating a home for himself, something verv different. The Maze Hill house
possesses what Vanbrugh would have called the 'Castle Air', which is to say it
attempts to evoke something of the romance of medieval castle architecture:
there is a round central tower, and square-plan corner towers tipped with
large-scale battlements. But the design was initially strictly svmmetrical
(apart from the off-centre main door), in conventional classical manner.  These
characteristics, combined with the almost utilitarian brick construction, mean
the building looks more like an evocation of Rome than of the English Middle
Ages. The east wing, however, was even more radical: designed by Vanbrugh only a
few years or so after the castle was completed, it makes the building somewhat
asymmetrical. In 1726 or so. this relaxed asymmetry and informality would have
been highly novel in a building with any real architectural or so. cial
pretensions.  Now cut west into the park and head to the high land rising in the
distance.
This plateau offers a sensational prospect, looking north. In the foreground is
the grassy remnant of a once formal garden created in 1662 for Charles II by
André Le Nôtre, Louis XIV's favourite landscape architect, and the brains behind
the garden at Versailles. This makes clear Charles's initial aspiration for
Greenwich. Then there is the Queen's House, and its flanking colonnades and
stucco-clad wings added in 1806-16, also to the designs of Daniel Asher
Alexander: then the Roval Hospital and the Thames; then the Isle of Dogs on the
north bank with a backdrop of the somewhat sinister arrav of commercial towers
of Canarv Wharf.  But nearer at hand is one of Greenwich's more remarkable
public buildings, which you reach after about 500 metres: the Royal Observatory,
now known as Flamsteed House, and named after the Astronomer Roval John Flamsteed who was
the first occupant of the observatory when it was completed in 1676.  The
building - again designed by Christopher Wren -is primarily a machine of
science. Its main feature is a large double-height octagonal room, fitted with
huge windows and the location of an array of powerful telescopes through which
the heavens could be scrutinised. But it also has other functions. It marks the
Prime Meridian - a line of longitude (essentially an arbitrary line, as opposed
to the lines of latitude, determined by the Equator and the Earth's axis of
ro-tation) that was accepted by most nations in 1884 as a key reference point
defining the precise time of day, and time zones, as in Greenwich Mean Time.
The design of the observatory is striking because Wren utilised the 'vernacular'
style he was to perfect for the rebuilding of a number of City churches (see
Walk 4). Wren's 'vernacular' approach is characterised by the use of
good-quality red brickwork, usually crafted with great skill, combined with a
limited use of pale Portland stone for important features such as keystones,
corner quoins and door surrounds. This largely brick construction was cheaper
than facing a building entirely with finely cut and squared stone, and was used
by Wren for structrues that were more humble in their purpose or for which a
less formal or monumental look was appropriate. This meant that sometimes even
the most ambitious buildings designed by Wren - such as Kensington Palace and
his extensions to Hampton Court Palace - are in brick and stone, because for
these projects a more domestic and less imperious architectural style was
thought essen-tial. The Observatory is one of Wren's earliest uses of this
brick-and-stone approach, and can be seen as one of his exploratory works.
Of the various stone details in the Royal Observatory I find the blocks that
make up the corners the most intriguing. They help reveal the origin of this
style and suggest Wren's sources. For example, quoins in Italian Renaissance
buildings like the sixteenth centurv Palazzo Farnese. Rome. and stone quoins
combined with red brick became a feature in northern French architecture in the
verv earl seventeenth century, such as the Place des Vosges in Paris. Stone
quoins and brick were a dominant element in English late-Elizabethan and
Jacobean buildings, such as Hatfield House, Hertfordshire, and Charlton House,
south London Indeed, Charlton House plays a peculiar role in the design of the
observatory. The pair of square-plan turrets are strikingly like the turrets at
Charlton House.  Perhaps this was a conscious reference because the house was
built from 1607 by the Crown to house the Dean of Durham and his royal charge,
James I's eldest son Prince Henry, who died in 1612. Are these turrets, then, a
reference to Charles Il's long-dead infant uncle and to the Stuarts'
all-embracing dynastic ambitions?  One of the towers, though, fulfils a more
functional role. On it stands a short mast and on this mast is a large red ball.
Every day the ball rises up the mast and falls rapidly at 1 p.m. This was for
ships moored on the Thames, and within visual contact, to set their timepieces.
It was more than just a useful service but a vital necessity: accurate
timekeeping was required to help determine longitude and thus the position of a
craft on the ocean and the direction and location of its destination.  From the
observatory take the central path through the park and head south. Soon you come
to a café.  Called the Pavilion and run by the Royal Parks, it is spacious,
clean, neo-Georgian in manner with a charming wrap-around colonnade, but
somewhat municipal - in the way most park cafés used to be And really nothing
wrong with that. If you are in need it's a most welcome oasis.  The next portion
of the walk has a rather different flavour. In contrast to the powerful
political architecture of the Royal Hospital and the observatory, we now enter a
world of tranquil domesticity - albeit domesticity of the grandest kind. Walk
west from the Pavilion café, around the south of the observatory complex, and
cut down the wide avenue running from north-west to south-east, before turning
west to leave the park via one of its west gates. You now stand on Croom's Hill,
which contains some of the most impressive domestic architecture in Greenwich.
The southern portion of Croom's Hill is discussed in detail in Walk 5. For now,
though, our route is to the north and towards the town centre. Immediately upon
leaving the park, to the north-west, you come to 52 Croom's Hill - The Grange -
which is a mid-seventeenth-and eighteenth-century house. While the main building
is hidden from public gaze by high walls and a deep garden, its gazebo - perched
above the road - is most visible. It's a charming thing, wrought of fine red
brickwork with rubbed brick architrave and cornice to its main window, and with
a pyramidal roof. Inside is a very good ornamental plaster ceiling, which looks
splendid from the street when light floods into the building's single room
through large windows to illuminate the pale interior. At dusk on summer
evenings, as the sun sets, the gazebo can glow like a lantern. It is dated 1672
and was probably designed by Robert Hooke, a friend of Wren's with whom he
worked on the design of the Monument in the Cit and several City churches. The
owner of The Grange at the time was William Hooker - a City figure and later a
Lord Mayor - which makes the Hooke connection plausible.  Almost all of the
houses north of here warrant careful scrutiny, between them telling the story of
two centuries of domestic architecture. Here, though, it will suffice to focus
on just a couple. First, number 34, set back from the street and with a wing to
its north that, with the projecting side of the late-eighteenth-century number
36, define a small front court. This is very much a Greenwich and Blackheath
form, as exemplified by 25 Dartmouth Row (see p. 187). The doorcase has simple
brackets supporting a cornice and a very fine and early fanlight, with its
radiating bars made of wood treated as small, panelled and inverted obelisks.
All must date from the 1720s or 1730s, although inside there is evidence of an
even earlier house. Then comes number 32, which also dates from the early
eighteenth century and also has a small front court defined by a wing. Most
notable is the doorcase with its deeply carved brackets set on Doric pilasters,
which The Buildings of England says has been reused from elsewhere. The carvings
include a pair of scallop shells, which were popular decorative motifs in the
late seventeenth and early eighteenth centuries.
But the most remarkable complex around Croom's Hill - which rather breaks with
our Stuart and early Georgian theme, but is too notable to be missed - is down a
narrow street going off to the west from number 26. It is the work of Michael
Searles, a prominent figure in the history of Blackheath and Greenwich who we
will meet again in Walk 5. The north side of the alleyway includes a wall that
is clad with what can only be described as a ghost elevation - pedimented, but
with blank windows of rather grand design. Searles attached this elevation to
the side of the existing Croom's Hill house to create a theatrical entry to a
new residential development known as Gloucester Circus, built from 1791 to 1809.
It is one of Searles's most intriguing projects, not least because a set of
early design drawings survive These show various compositional permutations,
with some incarnations of the circus formed by virtually free-standing houses
and others by houses that are more full linked to create a virtual terrace. The
circus was only half built (the north portion is now of conventional
mid-nineteenth-century construction) and Searles's houses have been much
altered, but it would appear that originally he went for a com-promise, giving
the circus a most striking rhythm by alternating pairs of houses, designed as
uniform blocks, some with arcaded ground-floor windows, linked by lower and
recessed entrance blocks to single pedimented houses. These houses are also
grouped as adjoining pairs, just to give added visual interest. The original
arrangement is more obvious in the western portion of the circus.  A particular
pleasure are the side elevations of the houses forming each end of the crescent.
That to the east, near Croom's Hill, appears a little odd because it's
truncated, with the upper portion built or rebuilt in plan manner leaving the
lower portion of the elevation somewhat wrong-footed. The side elevation to the
west was completed as intended. It is three windows wide (but all main windows
are blank. as in the ghost elevation) with centre windows and door framed by
piers that support an arch upon which reclines a pediment. Both of these end
houses have bold and bulbous full-height bavs. in tvpical Searles manner. These
buildings are superb architecture - sculptural, minimal, visually powerful - and
they represent Searles's determination to give speculative house building an
added artistic element, which we
will meet again on pp. 201-6.  While at the west end of the circus. take a brief
look along the street it leads into: Royal Hill. This remains one of the most
pleasing backwaters of Greenwich Much of the town is now taken up by tourism,
with the array of familiar shops and cafés that the tourist trade engenders
around the world. But Royal Hill retains authenticity. It is like wandering into
the Greenwich of the past: low-key, local in feel, and in-dividual. Though
that's not to say that it is entirely architecturally humble and anonvmous - at
its north end stands the tallest building in Greenwich, the Town Hall (or now
former Town Hall, for it has long been abandoned by the municipality and is now
in ever-changing mixed use), which is utterly and wonderfully alien to
Greenwich, indeed alien to much of Britain. It was designed in 1939 in a most
'pro-gressive' manner by a young architect called Clifford Culpin. He was
evidently smitten by the Romantic brick-built modern architecture of the
Netherlands and Scandinavia, particularly the works of the Dutch architect
Willem Marinus Dudok, who had an obsession for odd, cubistic brickwork. The
wonder is that Culpin persuaded the good burghers of Greenwich to go along with
his dream. The old Town Hall has a tall, slim, square-plan tower - seemingly
inspired by the tower of the town hall at Hilversum near Amsterdam, designed by
Dudok and completed in 1931 - and bold, functional elevations. Sadlv its
interior was much altered in the 1970s by the council, before it moved out.
Ofless idiosyncratic style is another building visible from the end of
Gloucester Circus. number 22 Roval Hill. This verv modest two-storev-high and
one-window-wide stucco-fronted house of uncertain date contains a family butcher
- a purvevor of 'tradi-tional meat, poultry and game' (a rarity now in town
centres increasinglv dominated by look-alike chains of cafés and supermarkets).
And beside it, at number 24, is a rare survivor of a now almost lost world of
early-eighteenth-century vernacular building - so humble and slightly built that
most were long ago swept awav. The sash boxes in the windows, which are set on
the same plane as the elevations, give a clue as to the building's age. This was
a construction technique that fell from fashion in London during the early
1730s, with the late adoption of a provision of a Building Act of 1709 that
boxes be set back four inches to prevent the spread of fire - a rule that was
very slow to have effect outside the Cities of London and Westminster.  This
marvellous little building, which is two rooms deep, has a centrally placed
chimney stack serving back and front rooms, with a staircase beside it. Large
and centrally placed brick-built chimney stacks are typical of
late-seventeenth-and early-eighteenth-century London vernacular buildings, and
contrived to serve two key functions. First, and obviously, they carried away
smoke. But second, and almost as impor-tant, they acted as large and solid
structural piers, in what were generally very slightly built houses. This small
but very important house is currently derelict, and has been for many years. It
is listed by the government as being of historic or architectural interest, but
one can't help but feel that there is a tragedy here waiting to happen.  For
somewhat more architectural fare, return to Croom's Hill - this time, for
variety, walking along the other side of Gloucester Circus - and head north,
taking note of number 24 on the north corner of the two streets: a very striking
late-eighteenth-century design, with a full-height bay to its centre, flanked by
second-floor lunettes. This structure is testament to the ability of anonymous
eighteenth-century builder-architects to handle the classical language in a most
deft, sophisticated and pleasing manner - these humble men were, as the poet
Thomas Gray put it, 'village-Hampdens' and 'mute inglorious Miltons' who, if
circumstances had been different, would no doubt have been famed and praised for
their artistic skill and erudition. Also good is number 14, which is rather like
a small country house and appears to date from the early eighteenth century. It
possesses a distinct architectural presence, with its centrally placed
ped-imented doorcase and small paved court that helps create a sense of
enclosure.  The builders of the houses on this stretch were clearly - and
rightly - aware of the potential offered by the prospect. This is particularly
clear to the north-east, along Nevada Street. To the east and south lies the
beauty of Greenwich Park, so many of these houses sprout bays calculated to
provide occupants with splendid views. Rather shockingly, number 10 has fitted
to its first-floor windows plastic sashes, which should be removed immediately.
History and beauty demands it.
At the north end of Croom's Hill, on Stockwell Street, is an unsettling new
arrival. It has been designed for the University of Greenwich, and, among other
things, houses the Department of Architec-ture. The building is most alien in
its aesthetic but this should not necessarily be a problem, given the generally
mixed architectural character of this part of Greenwich; in many respects it is
less alien than the 1930s former Town Hall. But with this Stockwell Street
building it's not only the design that is startlingly different to any of its
neighbours.  Also discordant are the materials of construction.  It is faced
with glass and pale stone cladding, while its neighbours are brick and stucco
(by tradition, in Greenwich stone is used for only the most important monumental
buildings). Perhaps worse, the scale of this new arrival is far larger than any
of the area's non-monumental and non-public buildings. The centre of Greenwich
is special and rare, and its established character ought to be protected and
enhanced, with new buildings subservient to old. But this building, rather than
being self-effacing, seems determined to steal the show from its historic
neighbours.  This precious site in the centre of sensitive Greenwich has been
treated as if it were in some more ordinary part of south London, where history
is less evident.  For me, this interloper does much to break the fragile spell
that has been cast by the journey down Croom's Hill to the centre of the town.
When this building is passed much happens. You walk over a deep railway cutting,
running west-east from Greenwich station to Maze Hill. and then on the right,
spread before you, is the town centre In this final stretch of the walk, the
nature of the architecture comes full circle: from the great political
statements of the Oueen's House and the Roval Hospi. tal, past the charming
mansions of Croom's Hill, and now back to political architecture of a very
different kind - in the form of Nicholas Hawksmoor's St Alfege church, where
this walk ends.  The town centre in its current form was recast in 1829-31 by
Joseph Kav, the architect of the Trafalgar Tavern. This was a radical makeover
because fif-teenth-century monastic remains and, no doubt, an array of
small-scale brick and timber buildings of vernacular design were replaced with
large, stucco-clad houses and shops of very metropolitan neoclassical design.
Perhaps the word for Kay's work is 'strident', and so arguably this Regency new
town centre offers some comfort to the architects of the new building on
Stockwell Street and some precedent for their assertive design. But, on the
other hand, there remains - after nearly 200 years - something awkward and odd
about Kay's architecture. It still seems too big, too orchestrated, as if it
were envisaged and built for a larger, more urban canvas Things are not helped
by the basic plan. Essentially Kay created no more than one hollow block of
roughly square form, which loosely echoed the previous layout - so no crescents,
circuses or urban flourishes.  Within this hollow block he located an open
market (now roofed over in a utilitarian and unbeautiful manner, but with a
charming alley on its south side), with terraces added to the outer edges of the
streets forming the north (College Approach) and south (Nel-son Road) edges of
the box. The west side is formed by ancient Greenwich Church Street.
Unfortunately traffic now hurtles in most noisy and visually disturbing manner
around the edges of this box - with Nelson Road being the saddest because here
Kay contrived to create his most urbane thoroughfare. with centre blocks dressed
with Grecian Ionic columns.
Some idea of what was swept away for this ambitious 'improvement' scheme is
suggested by what survives on the west side of Greenwich Church Street north of
the church. A sustained and irregular terrace contains a number of earl
buildings. of which number 17 is the most remarkable. It is small - only two
windows wide and the central pier between windows is only two and a half bricks
wide (less than 2 feet), which is about as narrow as a brick pier can get if the
nicety of brick bond and detailing are observed. Above the facade is a timber
eaves cornice, and above both numbers 15 and 17 rises a steep, tile-clad roof.
Inside there is a pair of central stacks - one serving the rear rooms of the
pair of houses and the other serving the front rooms. Between the stacks is a
pair of winding
staircases. All is very typical of vernacular building of the late seventeenth
century, from when this pair of houses must date.  But of course, the most
eye-catching building on Church Street is St Alfege church itself. This is one
of the great public buildings of Greenwich - built in 1711 to 1718 to the
designs of Nicholas Hawksmoor, with significant contributions from John James,
particularly the steeple that was not added to the top of the tower until 1730.
There was a medieval church on this site but the decision was taken to rebuild
using funds made available from the 1711 Act of Parliament to build 'Fifty New
Churches in London. Through a tax on coal, funds had been raised to help with
the construction of St Paul's Cathedral and various City churches after the
Great Fire (see Walk 4). But by 1711 this mighty project was virtually complete,
so the tax revenue was diverted to the mission to build monumental churches in
those parts of London that were expanding and that, more often than not, had
populations dominated by various bodies of Dissenters or Nonconformists. These
churches were political architecture. They were to make manifest the power of
the established church that, united with the state, was determined to proclaim
its presence and dominance in newly built or expanded quarters of the capital.
And, as the Commissioners for the Act evidently believed, to be successful in
their political aims, these new churches had to be big, architecturally
impressive and - in consequence - expensive.  As such, all are faced and
detailed in beautiful Portland stone. These churches, like Egyptian mortuary
temples, possess the sense that they were built for eternity.
St Alfege is visually striking, but not as idio-syncratic, abstract or strangely
intoxicating as Hawksmoor's slightly later churches built under the 1711 Act
-notably St Anne's Limehouse, St George-in-the-East and Christ Church
Spitalfields (see p. 44), which commenced in 1714. You might think that the
individualism of these later churches merely reflects the fact that Hawksmoor
was hitting his stride. But there is a little more to it. St Alfege was
Hawksmoor's first actual as opposed to theoretical design for the Commission,
and there seem to have been certain controls exerted upon him. And these
controls mean that the St Alfege's design - as fanciful as it might seem - is
more conventional than Hawksmoor's later designs.  The most obvious expression
of this is the fact that the body of the church is dressed with a giant order of
pilasters. Hawksmoor was not so conventional with his second-generation
churches. He had used a giant order before - notably in 1702 at Easton Ne-ston,
a country house in Northamptonshire, where, as at St Alfege, the order rises
majestically in a continuous fashion around the entire exterior of the building.
But by the second decade of the eighteenth century Hawksmoor had moved on
artistically - no doubt partlv inspired by his former master Sir John Vanbrugh -
to embrace a more elemental, abstract, sculptural and inventive interpretation
of the classical language of architecture.  Despite the presence of the somewhat
conventional giant order, St Alfege displays many of the more original ideas and
obsessions that Hawksmoor was to develop in his slightly later churches. We have
already encountered his obsession with early Christianity (see p. 91); in this
church, he explored the notion of the 'primitive' basilicas of the Christians,
by adding north and south transepts to the church to create a cross-shaped plan.
The origin of Christian churches within the traditions of Roman basilicas also
led Hawksmoor to ponder the manner of handling the tower and steeple - required
by Christian convention and liturgy but, of course, unprecedented in the design
of ancient basilicas. At St Alfege the solution was to place the west end of the
body of the church against the tower (which in fact was inherited from the
earlier church) so that the tower rises as a self-contained entitv from ground
level, and the temple-like body of the church appears visually (if not actually)
detached from the tower. This avoids the oddity of the tower emerging in
ungainly fashion from the top of the west end of the church, or being poised
uncomfortably above a pediment.  The design of St Alfege also reveals how
Hawksmoor worked as an architect, transferring ideas from one project to
another, and in the process adapting, refining and enriching them. The portico
giving the church the appearance of a mighty Roman temple when viewed from the
town centre is based on a design that he had produced earlier for Wren for St
Paul's Cathedral and that appears on the transept elevations of the earl Great
Model of the cathedral (see p. 159), but which ultimately did not appear on the
cathedral itself. Likewise, early designs for the top stage of St Alfege's tower
seem to have inspired his general approach to the later St George-in-the-East.
No ideas, it seems, were ever wasted.  Time to enter the church. The portico of
St Alfege is odd since it leads nowhere. It stands at the east end of the church
so behind it is the altar and choir, making the location of a central main door
here physically impossible, as well as liturgically undesirable.  Instead, then,
enter the church from the south. The interior of St Alfege was always something
of a 'work in progress' in comparison with Hawksmoor's later London churches. It
lacked power and the striking monumentality and sense of bold scale and geometry
that distinguishes Christ Church in particular. And what you see now is mostly a
generally faithful reconstruction after devastating damage during the Second
World War. But some details survived, including the finely wrought ironwork.
Before leaving there is one external detail that must not be missed: a small but
sublime example of Hawksmoor's love for the elemental. Outside each transept,
the entrances to the burial vaults beneath the church are capped by triangular
slabs of stone.  They are primitive - almost brutal - in appearance, and reduce
the elegance of the classical pediment to its bare essentials. These were the
portals to Hawksmoor's underworld. Their raw and unadorned form says something
about his attitude to the naked realities of death, the great equaliser. It is a
fitting end to this walk, which, between the ruins of Placentia, the Queen's
House and Charles II's doomed attempts at palace building, reveals much about
the pride and arrogance of generations of monarchs. In these slabs of stone,
Hawksmoor alludes to a truth that such buildings do not acknowledge: that in
death, worldly power and wealth count for nothing, and ornament is just another
form of vanity.


