This walk starts at one of the most famous landmarks in Britain: Tower
Bridge. This bridge is a rare thing – a much-admired structure of great
character, even though it was forged through endless committee meetings,
compromise, contradiction, uncertainty and a fair degree of absurdity. It has a
story worth considering at some length as you ascend from Tower Hill tube and
stroll south across the bridge. The tale starts in the mid 1870s, when it was
argued that a river crossing to the east of London Bridge would both improve
communications in the City and, by providing direct access to industry on the
south bank, increase the commercial potential of the docks on the north. There
was, for practical reasons, only one site possible – a strip of land just east
of the Tower of London – and a competition to find a suitable design was held.
This was supervised by the City of London Corporation, which grabbed the
initiative to build the new bridge. There was one key stipulation. It was not to
block the access of tall-masted cargo ships to the wharves at the Pool of
London, immediately to the west of the tower. To protect navigation the span of
the proposed bridge had to be either incredibly high or it would have to open in
some way to allow ships to pass through. Over fifty detailed designs were
submitted. Most were weird and wonderful, including a swing bridge, a ‘roller’
bridge incorporating steam-operated sections that rolled from pier to pier, and
a high-level bridge. All offered more or less workable solutions – some more
expensive and complex than others – but all would visually overpower the
historic tower and its setting. Many thought this far from desirable. Debate
raged and two distinct interest groups emerged, each of which believed it should
be responsible for the design and construction of the new bridge. There was the
City Corporation, which had organised the competition and believed the proposed
bridge was its responsibility. The City did, after all, begin just to the west
of the site, and it had the funds to see the works to completion. They were to
come from the City’s Bridge House estate, a body established in the early
thirteenth century to collect tolls and rents from all using or residing on
London Bridge. The City had, over the centuries, used the resulting money to buy
and develop property, and build other bridges across the Thames – notably
Blackfriars Bridge in the 1760s. By the 1870s the money was there to build the
proposed bridge by the tower. On the other hand there was the Metropolitan Board
of Works (MBW), which had been established in 1855 to improve London’s roads and
sewers (see p. 336). The engineer responsible for these works was Joseph
Bazalgette, and in the mid 1870s he produced a design for the MBW for a
high-level bridge adjoining the tower. When the MBW submitted this scheme as
part of a private Parliamentary bill, the battle lines were drawn. The City – in
the person of its architect Horace Jones – objected to the proposed design and
in 1879 submitted its alternative scheme. Designed by Jones himself, it solved
the problems of navigation by proposing that the bridge should have a roadway
which rose to allow ships to pass. This solution also offered the opportunity
for the new crossing to be designed as a medieval-style drawbridge or city gate:
a composition that, argued the City, would allow the new structure to sit in
happy harmony with the adjoining medieval Tower of London. Competing visions of
Tower Bridge: the designs submitted by Joseph Bazelgette for the MBW (Top) and
Horace Jones for the City Corporation (Above). The logic of this suggestion gave
the City the edge in the debate and the project moved inexorably into its hands.
After ironing out some technical problems – the drawbridge was originally to be
raised by chains, which promised to be so slow that it would almost always be
neither up nor down – a final design was settled upon, with the help of the
engineer John Wolfe Barry. Jones and Barry were grilled by a House of Commons
Select Committee which established that, from the technical and operational
point of view at least, the City’s proposal was a goer. And then, when all
seemed settled, Queen Victoria spoke up. The queen had opposed the bridge for
some time: she feared that a new bridge, on the eastern edge of the Tower of
London and including a carriageway overlooking its walls, would not only be an
eyesore but would fatally compromise the tower’s continuing role as a fortress
and royal redoubt in times of crisis – a fear that was not as unfounded as it
sounds in the 1880s, a decade of social unrest, Fenian terrorism and growing
republicanism. In December 1884 the queen stirred herself from the torpor of her
perpetual widowhood to make her opinion known. Her private secretary, General
Ponsonby, passed to the relevant authorities the queen’s ‘deep distrust’ of the
bridge, and let it be known that she was ‘strongly opposed’ to any proposal that
would undermine the defensive potential of the tower.6 When Barry hastened to
reassure the queen, Ponsonby replied, ‘Bosh!’ What was to be done? The case for
a new bridge was unarguable, and had on its side not only the City but also the
general public. Yet the queen and the royal party stood firm in their
opposition, continuing to argue that the proposed bridge would be a serious
‘disfigurement’. For a moment it seemed that the proposal, if not handled deftly
and in most diplomatic manner, could provoke a constitutional crisis and do
irreparable damage to the British monarchy. Eventually, though, the royal party
blinked. The queen and her courtiers realised that she not only risked provoking
resentment but was also inviting humiliation: to ride roughshod over popular
opinion was not good, but to attempt to do so and lose was to court disaster for
the monarchy and fuel the growing spirit of republicanism. The Queen retreated
and in August 1885 the Parliamentary bill to build the new bridge received royal
asset – no doubt very grudgingly. In a wise attempt to embrace the inevitable
and associate itself in positive manner with this major London ‘improvement’,
the royal party arranged with the City for the queen’s son – Edward, Prince of
Wales – ceremonially to inaugurate construction in April 1886 by ‘driving in’
the bridge’s first pile. The bridge quickly started to take form, and a most
strange form it was. In its initial years it looked astonishingly modern, being
no more than a strong and utilitarian steel-made structural frame – an honest
expression of the means of construction and of its function. The basic design
strategy is still apparent: the twin towers rise on piers that are connected to
the land by carriageways, which are supported from above by wrought-iron members
that curve down to lower towers on the banks on either side. Between the tall
main towers are the drawbridge sections of carriageway. Jones’s original
chain-drawn mechanism, ultimately rejected as too slow, was replaced by a
‘bascule’ or see-saw system, around which the two centre towers were built. In
the bascule system, each section of road is counterbalanced by a mighty weight,
which descends into a huge chamber when the bridge is opened. At first this was
all powered by a cutting-edge coal-fuelled hydraulic engine, which has long
since replaced by electricity. But the whole mechanism means that, like a ship,
Tower Bridge has always had a crew and a bridgemaster, an engine room, a
bridge-like control cabin, and vast and cavernous spaces in the bowels of the
piers, rather like the holds within a great vessel. This makes the bridge like
no other in London, a moving – almost a living – thing. Of course, the fashion
for the display of ruthlessly engineered construction had not quite arrived,
certainly not in the City of London – although the idea of unornamented
engineering being in itself a structure’s primary ornament was being pioneered
at the same time, far to the north, with the construction of the Forth Railway
Bridge, built between 1882 and 1890. Tower Bridge’s steel frame was quickly clad
with a richly detailed veneer of granite and Portland stone. These finishes, it
was believed, gave the bridge the cultural pedigree to raise it above mere
functionality and, in theory, to sit comfortably with the neighbouring Tower of
London. It didn’t quite work. After Jones died in 1887, his design was modified
into an even more peculiar form by Barry. He decided to replace Jones’s High
Medieval – or ‘Middle Pointed’ – details with those in the Tudor Gothic style.
Jones’s architecture would not have particularly harmonised with the Romanesque
details of the White Tower, but Barry’s mechanistic-looking late Gothic –
probably chosen to honour the Palace of Westminster designed four decades
previously by his father, Charles Barry (see p. 287) – was even less visually
sympathetic. The overall effect is to give the structure a more than slightly
fake old world charm. The old world charm of Tower Bridge now sits against a
backdrop of City skyscrapers. You either like such frippery or you don’t. When
the bridge was completed in 1894, though, Londoners showed very quickly that
they did. Within a few years Tower Bridge became one of the unofficial symbols
of the city – the water gate into the City from the south and the City’s great
gateway to the massive dock system downstream on the south bank and to Britain’s
vast empire beyond. Today, Tower Bridge is a London institution, its evolution
and appearance an epitome of the contradictory values of the late-Victorian age:
a pioneering new building designed to look old; a monument to modern capitalism
that was nearly scuppered by the monarchy; a purely commercial enterprise that,
through its romantic appearance, caught the imagination of the nation.


Go down the steps at the south-west corner of Tower Bridge, and cross under the
road. You are now standing in one of the most infamous sections of the Victorian
city. To the east, a wide and deep inlet marks the spot where the River
Neckinger flows into the Thames. In the late eighteenth and early nineteenth
century this inlet, the stinking drainage ditches around it, and the marshy land
they defined was a slum known as Jacob’s Island or Dockhead. Here was an area of
intense poverty rather than useful industry, with the mounds of marsh covered
with decrepit structures and slum dwellings of the meanest sort. The centre of
the ‘island’ was London Street and Jacob Street, running parallel to each other,
east from St Saviour’s Dock to George Row. These streets were set alongside wide
ditches, with that next to George Row emptying directly into the Thames. All –
streets, houses and the ditches – are long gone, replaced by
late-nineteenth-century warehouses that have since been converted into smart
flats and studios. George Cruikshank’s illustration of Bill Sikes’s death at
Jacob’s Island, published in February 1839 to accompany the syndication of
Oliver Twist. Nineteenth-century literature gives us a glimpse of what Jacob’s
Island once held. In Oliver Twist, Charles Dickens selected it as the scene for
the dramatic demise of the murderous thief Bill Sykes, who plunged to his death
in the island’s Folly Ditch, also known as Hickman’s Folly. The novel was
published in 1838 so it is reasonable to assume that Dickens’s description –
although somewhat emphatic and over-drawn for dramatic purposes – presents a
recognisable likeness of Jacob’s Island as it appeared in the early Victorian
age. There were, he observed, Crazy wooden galleries common to the backs of half
a dozen houses, with holes from which to look upon the slime beneath; windows,
broken and patched, with poles thrust out, on which to dry the linen that is
never there; rooms so small, so filthy, so confined, that the air would seem to
be too tainted even for the dirt and squalor which they shelter; wooden chambers
thrusting themselves out above the mud and threatening to fall into it – as some
have done; dirt-besmeared walls and decaying foundations, every repulsive
lineament of poverty, every loathsome indication of filth, rot, and garbage: all
these ornament the banks of Jacob’s Island.7 Dickens’s description must only
have added to the mythic status of Jacob’s Island as the archetypal Victorian
slum. Just over a decade later, in 1849, the journalist turned social observer
and reformer, Henry Mayhew, described the area in similar terms: ‘On entering
the precincts of the pest island the air had literally the smell of a graveyard,
and a feeling of nausea and heaviness came over any one unaccustomed to imbibe
the musty atmosphere. It is not only the nose, but the stomach that tells how
heavily the air is loaded with sulphuretted [sic] hydrogen.’ The smell was no
doubt largely thanks to the proximity of the leather industry, but certainly
wasn’t helped by the ‘swollen carcasses of dead animals, ready to burst with the
gases of putrefaction’, nor by the shoreline’s ‘heaps of indescribable filth,
the phosphoretted smell from which told you of the rotting fish there, while the
oyster-shells were like pieces of slate from their coating of filth and mud’ and
the water was ‘almost as red as blood from the colouring matter that [poured]
into it from the reeking leather-dresser’s close by’.8 Jacob’s Island was
evidently seen to represent the darkest, most dismal and dangerous aspects of
the city – a place where the rot of the material world seemed to be emblematic
of deep spiritual malaise, and which opened a window into a world of depravity.
So it is hardly surprising that eventually it would be visited by the most
characteristically Victorian representation of evil, Spring-heeled Jack. To this
day few agree who or what Spring-heeled was. He first appeared in October 1837,
when a servant named Mary Stevens claimed she was attacked on Clapham Common by
a figure that held her in a firm grip, kissed her face, ripped her clothes and
caressed her flesh with claws that were ‘cold and clammy as those of a corpse’.
The girl screamed, rescuers arrived, the attacker fled and disappeared without
trace. The next day, he struck again in south London, causing a coachman to
crash his vehicle. Passers-by rushed to the scene to see a cackling figure make
a getaway by leaping over a 9-foot-high wall. Now the press started to make much
of these strange stories and soon christened the mysterious miscreant
‘Spring-heeled Jack’. Public interest in the phenomenon increased rapidly and in
early January 1838 even the Lord Mayor of London, Sir John Cowan, involved
himself in the mystery. He tried to get to the bottom of it by holding a public
meeting to explore various explanations. No consensus was reached but more cases
were presented, which mostly concerned servants or young ladies being frightened
practically out of their wits by the antics of a strangely garbed leaping,
babbling and laughing personage. A few weeks later the most detailed and
well-observed manifestations took place. On 19 February Jane Alsop was attacked
at her home in Old Ford, Stepney, during which her clothes were shredded and her
flesh scratched by Jack’s claws, with rescue coming in the perhaps unlikely form
of her young sister. Nine days later Jack struck again, this time near Narrow
Street, Limehouse, when he savaged eighteen-year-old Lucy Scales who, while
walking with her sister along Green Dragon Lane, was set upon by a
fire-breathing fiend and terrified into a faint, but with no serious harm being
done. By the beginning of the 1840s, the appearance of this high-leaping phantom
started to be agreed: he had claws, eyes like ‘red balls of fire’, and
‘diabolical’ features, wore a black cloak, tight-fitting white oilskins and some
kind of helmet, and breathed blue and white flames. This was the form he took
when he supposedly appeared in Jacob’s Island. In 1977, the journalist Peter
Haining would describe Jack’s most notorious crime in a successful book, The
Legend and Bizarre Crimes of Spring-heeled Jack. Jack, he reported, appeared at
the island in November 1845, and proceeded to attack a ‘bedraggled young
prostitute of thirteen years old’, Maria Davis: ‘Huddled behind their windows,
the few eyewitnesses said Jack picked the terrified girl up in his arms and with
one jerk hurled her into the fowl, muddy waters below.’9 Nobody came to her aid
and she sank to her death – forgotten, it seems, until her tale was told by
Haining over a century later. Most terrifying. But Maria Davis’s story could be
the stuff of myth. Haining is dead and can’t now defend or explain himself, but
those who have attempted to verify this tale claim to have been unable to find
corroborating, independent, contemporary evidence. So perhaps the dastardly
slaying did not happen – or perhaps the late Haining looked and found where
others have failed. It remains something of a mystery but, I suppose, in such
ways urban legends are born. Besides, whether Haining embellished the history of
Jack is not really the point. Certainly, in one form or another, Jack existed in
the Victorian imagination. Even if his sightings were perhaps no more than a
manifestation of endemic hysteria, they surely reveal a collective fear of
arbitrary punishment for the unspecified but ubiquitous sins of the city,
embodied by such dire districts as Jacob’s Island. By the end of the century
Jack was so embedded in the lore of London that it seems likely his name
inspired a later terroriser of the city’s underbelly: Jack the Ripper. Indeed it
is impossible to understand the atmosphere surrounding the Whitechapel murders
of 1888 without knowing something about Spring-heeled Jack: both were
interpreted as the embodiment of the dark spirits that were supposed to lurk in
the shadows of London. And, unlike the original Jack, the blood and corpses that
trailed in the wake of the Ripper made it startlingly clear that he was real
enough – the culmination of a street terror that had its origins fifty years
earlier. The character of Jacob’s Island as backwater of outcast London lingered
through much of the nineteenth century. Eventually, though, hovels and ditches
gave way to ranks of hardy and wholesome warehouses and wharves, of the sort
illustrated by Doré. While his warehouse illustrations are to a degree generic –
each likely a collage inspired by a number of Thames-side streets – one caption
does suggest that the area provided inspiration for some of the sketches. The
picture in question shows brick warehouses with loading bays set in tall
arcades, a tier of three bridges linking warehouses, and much handling and
loading of massive bales. Its caption refers to Miles Lane, Duck’s Foot Lane,
and ‘not far off’ Pickle-Herring Street, which was the westward extension of
Shad Thames – the road running parallel to the Thames on the south side opposite
the Tower of London.10 By the end of the century the desperate days of Shad
Thames and Jacob’s Island were over. A later portrait of the area is offered by
the social reformer and philanthropist Charles Booth, who we last met in Walk 9.
On 5 and 6 June 1899 Booth and his secretary walked through Bermondsey with a PC
Watts, ‘a thorough going policeman, heavy in build, manner and in tread’.11 In
the area around Shad Thames, Booth noted ‘mostly wharves and warehouses … with
the River at hand, but blocked out by the high buildings, and even the sky
partly hidden by the cast iron bridges that have been thrown across the
roadway’. While far from rich, the district was also hardly impoverished: Booth
categorised many of the houses pink in his colour-coded analysis of the social
and physical fabric of London, denoting homes that were ‘fairly comfortable’
with residents commanding ‘good ordinary earnings’. Not all of the social
problems had gone – nearby, Booth observed ‘tumble-down houses’ with ‘women,
loud voiced and foul tongued … as they flung threatening oaths at some
children’; but by and large this was now a place of industry, not squalor.


What of this world now survives? The atmosphere of a working dockland has long
gone, but a good number of late-nineteenth-century warehouses are still
standing, serving as smart apartments, studios, offices, shops and restaurants.
Many retain an array of bridges or hoists, but which are now no more than
curious and picturesque urban ornaments. The best are in the arm of Shad Thames
that runs south-west and parallel to St Saviour’s Dock. These are robust,
functional and handsome brick structures whose names, still emblazoned on their
walls, proclaim the identity of their former owners or the areas of the world
from which their contents came. There’s Jamaica Wharf, Shuters Wharf,
Christians, and Java Wharf, where sacks of exotic spices were once heaped in
pungent profusion. Much, though, has been lost. When I first encountered Shad
Thames in the late 1960s, the majority of the street was framed by tall, gaunt
and very utilitarian warehouses, in use mainly for the storage of tea, coffee
and varied spices. Now, the eastern portion of the street is defined by the
ungainly bulk of the former premises of the Design Museum (currently a café and
flats). And the portion immediately to the east of Tower Bridge has the feel of
a film set: at first glance it looks reasonably authentic, but much of the
architecture is deceptively recent, the cobbled road surface wrong and, of
course, traditional riverside life entirely absent. A number of atmospheric
alleys penetrate the bulky former warehouses to connect Shad Thames to the
riverside quay that, after much campaigning, was secured for public use. These
alleys are the last memory of the work pattern here, when dockers scurried
through them carrying loads between ship and street. They also hint at the
nature of the area before its industrial development, when it was formed by a
maze of narrow ditches, alleys and islands of houses. The bridges between Shad
Thames warehouses are a memory of the nineteenth-century work pattern. From the
south-western end of Shad Thames, go west along Tooley Street and cross Tower
Bridge Road. This portion of the walk takes us through the mercantile hub of
Victorian Bermondsey – from London Bridge station, via the warehouses of
Bermondsey Street district, to the centre of London’s leather industry. Our
first port of call is the doleful wastes of Potters Field Park, now a windswept
and unlovely public space including a somewhat trampled lawn and ‘amphitheatre’.
When first completed, nearly twenty years ago, this gesture seemed to be of
little practical use to anyone, but recently things have changed and there is
now potential. In 2017 the 900-seat Bridge Theatre opened nearby – opposite the
lawn – with the splendid address One Tower Bridge, within a new apartment
building. It houses the London Theatre Company, operating under the
inspirational leadership of Nicholas Hytner (formerly artistic director of the
National Theatre). The interior space is ‘flexible’ – the company has staged
promenade and ‘in the round’ productions – so no doubt the inventive Hytner will
soon find a good and creative use for this conveniently located amphitheatre.
There was anciently a street called Potter’s Fields running across the site, so
the park’s name is logical. But it is also a trifle unfortunate. When Judas
repented of his betrayal of Christ for ‘thirty pieces of silver’, he cast down
the money in the temple and then hanged himself; the chief priests pondered the
use they could lawfully and ethically make of the money and finally decided to
buy the ‘potter’s field, to bury strangers in’. Ever since, a Potter’s Field has
been a burial ground of unknown or itinerant people.12 Here, the name is
appropriate. It is, in a way, a deadly place: at least it makes my spirits
wither. Perhaps, in time, the presence of the Bridge Theatre might yet bring the
space to life. Hytner might consider a play about betrayal and ethics as a way
of inaugurating the amphitheatre – particularly appropriate because amongst the
glitzy architecture defining the ‘park’ presides the glass-blob that houses the
Mayor of London. This building, opened in 2002, was designed by the office of
the much-admired Lord Foster and is a pioneering example of the recent school of
silly-shaped and ‘whacky’ City structures, all of weird form and all calculated
to attract commercial clients by their charming and characterful excesses. The
best of this breed are the ‘Gherkin’, also designed by Foster’s office and Ken
Shuttleworth, and the ‘Shard’, nearby at London Bridge, designed by the Genoese
architect Renzo Piano. But the mayor’s office is, of course, not a commercial
but a public building that should in some way symbolise the majesty and dignity
of London. Its ephemeral and corporate-looking ‘charm’ falls very short of the
mark. Walk south-west along More London Place, a geometrical and not unpleasing
sliver of a passage, which leads back to Tooley Street and the remains of a more
vigorous and muscular world. Tooley Street was a great mercantile thoroughfare
in the nineteenth century, lined with ware-houses, offices and railway
structures related to London Bridge station which sits, at high level,
immediately to its south. Today, little of the original station is still
standing – it was recently comprehensively redeveloped into its current form –
but a few glimpses of its Victorian origins remain. Take the viaducts. These
great arches, inspired by Roman aqueducts, not only gave the new railways a
heroic antique quality but also meant that trains could sail above
long-established road networks and thus cause minimal disruption. The first of
these soon ubiquitous railway viaducts was constructed here in 1836. By the mid
Victorian period viaducts also provided a handy income for the rail companies
that owned them because the arches could be let for various uses. One of the
more charming sections stands round the corner from Tooley Street, in St Thomas
Street and Crucifix Lane. Here the viaduct is concealed behind a mid-Victorian
ornamental screen formed of polychromatic brick arches. These are punctuated by
piers whose pillars are embellished with stone-carved heads – likely the faces
of the men who were creating or enlarging the station at the time. Many of these
arches look immensely strong, with barrel vaults wrought of striking and
handsome bricks. They certainly are strong enough to support the trains that
hurtle above. But their impressive appearance can be deceptive. During the First
and Second World Wars, London’s railway viaducts were used as public air-raid
shelters, and more than once this led to disaster. When faced with a bomb packed
with explosives, the relatively thin brickwork is horribly vulnerable and easily
penetrated; on the night of 25 October 1940, during the Blitz, a bomb crashed
through the roof a little to the east of this spot, at the intersection of
Tanner Street and Druid Street. Seventy-seven of the people sheltering inside
were killed. An archly modern portion of the redeveloped London Bridge station
(above), site of the lost South Eastern Railway offices (inset). The viaducts
are not the only notable pieces of Victorian railway architecture to have been
built in this area. One of the most exemplary was the South Eastern Railway
Offices, at 64–84 Tooley Street, which once served the company that operated
London Bridge station. It was a monumental work – completed in 1893 to the
designs of Charles Barry Jr – the brother of John Wolfe Barry – which oozed
pride in its function, in the company that built it and in the railways in
general. It was a pleasure to contemplate, a message from another, sadly lost
world when offices did not have to be silly or whacky in appearance but grand,
dignified, sophisticated, well designed and beautifully built. Needless to say,
its more recent owners, Network Rail, felt obliged to demolish the offices as
part of its destructive upgrading of London Bridge station. They stood when I
started this book and are now gone, replaced by a meagre open space and station
entrance. Inexplicably, the building was not listed, and the frantic efforts to
save it came to nothing, largely

because demolition was approved by Southwark Council and supported by the London
mayor’s office when Boris Johnson was mayor. Writing about the architecture of
London is a great pleasure – but can also be heartbreaking. You might at this
point like to repair to the splendid mid-Victorian Shipwrights Arms, which
adjoins the eastern edge of the site of the lost railway offices. If you do you
will find yourself walking beneath the welcoming and outstretched arms of a
half-naked female figure that hovers, in perpetuity, above the main door to the
hostelry – forever doing her best to stop a tier of windows tumbling on to
customers below. Alternatively, follow the road to the south-east of the
Shipwrights Arms. This is Bermondsey Street, which plunges underneath the
platforms and tracks of London Bridge station, before breaking into the open air
at the junction of St Thomas Street and Crucifix Lane. We are now in the heart
of Bermondsey’s historical leather-making district, a world populated by a
number of sublime industrial buildings. The northern portion of the street is
worth taking in slowly, if only to appreciate fully the rich mix of
architectural styles that inhabit it. Take, for example, numbers 47–59. At
number 55 stands The Tanneries, a monumental Venetian Gothic warehouse, its
ornamented brick-built exterior giving romantic and cultured pedigree to an
otherwise utilitarian interior. Two doors down, at number 59, is a bold
neo-Baroque composition of around 1900, vaguely in the manner of the 1720s. And
the eclectic and variable nature of mid-nineteenth-century industrial
architecture is confirmed by number 50: here, an alleyway leads down to an
archetypal ‘wall of glass’ warehouse – very proto-modern – with the elevations
to each floor formed by generous areas of glazing, including glazed doors to
tiers of loading bays. This was not just an industrial street – it was also
populated by shops, houses and taverns. On the west side is arguably its most
sensational architectural moment. Numbers 68–78 Bermondsey Street is a group of
houses that date from the late seventeenth to the early nineteenth centuries.
Look out for the wide and tall arched opening – leading to the cobbled
Carmarthen Place – which is adorned with a river-god keystone that appears to be
made of Coade terracotta or ‘artificial stone’, a much-favoured material in the
late eighteenth century. The Regency shopfronts on numbers 68 and 70 are
terrific, but the best moment comes with number 78. This
late-seventeenth-century house is altogether remarkable. The pedimented oriel
window set at first-floor level – generously glazed and with delightful quadrant
corners – would once have been a common feature of London’s thoroughfares, but
virtually none are now left, and certainly none as fine as this. Also notable is
its timber-framed construction with a plastered front and clapboard-clad top
storey – again, a common practice for modest houses in pre-nineteenth-century
London – which is now a rarity. All in all, it offers an insight into ordinary
street architecture in the peripheral areas of London in the decades around
1700. It is a reminder that in this city, the most extraordinary domestic and
industrial architecture can often be found side by side. The monumental Venetian
Gothic of The Tanneries. A little further down Bermondsey Street you come to a
crossroads. To the left is the western portion of Tanner Street, its north side
lined with an impressive array of tall, mid-to late-nineteenth-century
warehouses. To the west is Morocco Street – another leather reference, because
Morocco was the name of the high-quality leather used for ladies’ gloves, shoe
uppers and in book binding. This is the route to take, stopping first at number
2a, one of the most quietly pleasing buildings you could hope to come upon.
Probably dating to the 1890s, it has a front elevation faced with white glazed
bricks, a device that not only lightens the street but also means the façade can
be easily washed. The original function of the building is revealed by the pair
of life-size horse heads that terminate each end of the ground-floor fascia:
this was, of course, a farrier’s. Most charmingly of all, number 2a is not yet
some gorgeous restaurant or exquisite shop, but continues in the modern
equivalent of its original function. Now, rather than farriers clipping hooves
and shoeing horses, mechanics mend car tyres and tinker with engines. The
prospect looking west from the farrier’s is wonderful. Morocco Street curves
around to the south-west and Leathermarket Street branches due west, the cusp of
the division being formed by a splendid curved warehouse around which the ways
divide like water breaking each side of a ship’s bow. To the left there is
virtually nothing to be seen but sturdy late-nineteenth-century warehouses. And
some of these warehouses are very good indeed. Number 1 Morocco Street – still
proclaiming its past life as a ‘Leather Factors’ in large faded lettering – is
particularly fine, with the light entering its upper floors maximised by having
windows separated not by thick slabs of brickwork but by slender cast-iron
columns. There are more treats, though, to be found by turning right, down
Leathermarket Street. Enjoy the utilitarian brick-built warehouses on its south
side until you reach its west junction with Weston Street. The ways divide like
water breaking each side of a ship’s bow: the view west along Morocco Street. On
these roads’ southern corner stands a truly remarkable building, which formed
the heart of the leather industry in late-Victorian Bermondsey. The London
Leather, Hide and Wool Exchange, dated 1878, was designed by George Elkington in
an eclectic amalgam of historic styles – an approach beloved of mid-and
late-Victorian architects intent on drawing on historic precedent to forge
something completely new. It is essentially late Elizabethan or Jacobean with a
dash of Flemish Renaissance, but with a twist to make it look like nothing built
in Tudor or Stuart England or the seventeenth-century Low Countries. The most
charming details are the giant and muscular ‘Atlas’ figures which hold up the
entablature above the main door, and the round, stone-carved panels within the
ground-floor windows, each of which illustrates a different aspect of the
leather trade. But this entrancing building is only half the story. Immediately
to its south is another building, part of the same exchange, which is quite as
exciting but in a very different way. This is the leather market itself, built
in 1833. Where the exchange is all whimsical historicism, with naive
embellishments, the market is wonderfully tough and practical, a commercial
structure designed to express solidity and substance. It seems to have a resolve
as hard as the granite base upon which it sits. And yet, on closer inspection,
it has more than a touch of opulence. The long, low frontage – hard yellow
bricks with dashes of sandstone – makes it clear that this building was a secure
place and leather a most valuable material. And the windows, framed by giant
Tuscan pilasters, are calculated to proclaim that this is not just a solid,
working building but also a temple of commerce, expressing the solemn majesty
and moral certitude of legitimate trade and industry. The complex of buildings
ceased to function as a leather exchange as early as 1912 – it now houses a mix
of small businesses, including a café and an excellent pub. But its architecture
is evocative enough to still conjure images of Victorian craftsmen and traders
heckling over pieces of leather. Make your way back to Bermondsey Street and
continue south, past the junction with Tanner Street. Here you’ll find – at
number 96 – an excellent boulangerie named Comptoir Gourmand, if you now fancy a
coffee and a bun. While the warehouses and exchanges on and around the northern
end of the street tell a story of industry and commerce, the buildings we
encounter from here onwards reveal more about leisure in the nineteenth century:
there are not only some glorious houses, but also a couple of good Victorian
pubs, the Garrison and the Woolpack (virtually facing each other), a church, and
even a philanthropic club. Intriguingly, many of these buildings reveal that our
modern-day distinction – work versus pleasure, public versus private – was
remarkably permeable until late in the nineteenth century. Take the large,
brick-fronted building at number 169 Bermondsey Street, which must date from
around 1800. It looks, in some ways, like a regular early-nineteenth-century
house – yet it was also a shop, manufactory and warehouse. It hints at the way
the industrial architecture of the later nineteenth century emerged out of the
traditions of Georgian domestic design. The building’s interior sports the
robust timber and cast-iron construction befitting an industrial structure, yet
with delicate fire surrounds suggesting domestic comfort, with one most
charmingly embellished with a tablet emblazoned with a sheep or goat, referring
presumably to the local hide industry. And it is beautiful, too: the widely
spaced windows are each divided by a sliver of a vertical recess – a
functionally unnecessary detail that elevates mere utilitarian construction into
poetic architecture. The local legend is that this building once housed the
London factory of the famed hat-maker Christy’s, founded in 1773. Overall it
evokes a pleasing impression of a finely poised machine, but with all the
humanity of a residential building designed for comfort, convenience and visual
delight. This blurring of work and leisure was not just a Victorian phenomenon.
Nearby is the vast White Cube Gallery, a large private commercial enterprise
that seems to be posing as some sort of public museum – so a modern example of
leisure and pleasure combined with hard-nosed commerce. (Virtually opposite is a
recently opened café named ‘Fuckoffee’. Fair comment, I suppose.) And nearby, at
numbers 187–9, we see work and leisure in the early twentieth century. This
building, dated 1907, was constructed to house the ‘Time and Talents
Settlement’, as is proclaimed on the frieze in rather beautiful and curvaceous
lettering. It was founded in 1887 by a group of affluent West End Protestant
ladies who believed that their coddled, educated and leisured daughters ought to
make an effort to help the


less fortunate young women of south-east and east London. The ladies of the
Bermondsey Street branch operated a ‘club room’ for the local girls and sought
to teach them ‘healthy recreations’ including singing, basket-making, knitting
and sewing. Here, we see how for many Victorians and Edwardians, leisure was not
just about enjoyment: it was about dutifully bettering oneself, and helping the
poor. Incredibly, this worthy and well-meaning but inevitably patronising
enterprise – which naturally failed to tackle the root causes of Bermondsey’s
social aliments – continued in this building until the early 1960s. Indeed the
settlement lives yet, but transformed and transported to a community centre in
Rotherhithe, rather alarmingly named the Old Mortuary. Architecturally, the
Bermondsey building is a curious fusion of the Queen Anne Revival, with a dash
of Baroque Revival, and art nouveau – all most unusual. The Time and Talents
Settlement’s peculiar attitude to philanthropy was, of course, much to do with
faith. Fitting, then, that at the time the neighbouring 191 Bermondsey Street
was the rectory for St Mary Magdalen church, which stands a little down the
road. This is one of south London’s most remarkable churches, still with a large
churchyard attached. Apart from its squat fifteenth-century west tower, it was
rebuilt in l675–9 by Charles Stanton, a Southwark master carpenter who also, in
the late 1690s, designed and built the body of St Nicholas, Deptford. The
exterior of St Mary’s was clad in stucco in 1830 at which time the
Bermondsey-based architect George Porter remodelled the west front in charming,
playful and utterly unscholarly Gothic manner. This gives the exterior an
eclectic nineteenth-century feel. The interior was modelled on Wren’s St Martin
Ludgate – which is to say columns advance into the volume of the building, to
define a cruciform plan incorporating a chancel to the east, transepts to north
and south, and nave to the west. Inside changes have been gradual and
conservative, with much surviving from various periods, including the south
gallery of 1794, which still retains its box pews complete with their doors. The
charming, playful and utterly unscholarly Gothic charm of St Mary Magdalen
church. The adjacent churchyard is guarded by a pair of early-nineteenth-century
watch-houses, erected to protect the dead from body-snatchers, who at that time
frequently went in search of newly-buried bodies, almost impossible to acquire
but highly valued by the medical profession for anatomical study. The tombs and
memorials, scattered through the churchyard, are amongst the best in central
London. The first thing to observe is that a number of the handsome table or
altar tombs retain their protective palisades of cast-and wrought-iron railings
– very rare in London, where most have rusted or were ‘salvaged’ in the early
1940s to be turned into fighting material to assist the war effort. The most
striking tomb is a minuscule but perfect neoclassical affair. I’ve walked past
it, on and off, for decades and never really noticed it until recently. This now
strikes me as typical of city life when, caught in the day-to-day bustle, we see
very little beyond the big, boisterous and showy. This exquisite little tomb is
none of these things. It’s something you could almost take home and place in
your drawing room. It consists of a small Portland stone sarcophagus, less than
a metre long at its base, of Roman form, with tapering sides and a surface
embellished with wavy, concentric lines called strigilation. This decoration is
part of the neoclassical language of death, beloved by architects such as Sir
John Soane, and seems to have been used by Romans to ornament their sarcophagi
either to symbolise the waters of the River Styx, over which the spirit of the
dead must pass, or to simulate the lines impressed on the flesh of a corpse
after its ritual cleaning with oils and fork-like scrapers. At both ends of the
diminutive sarcophagus are the bronze heads of lions, one still grasping a ring
in its mouth, and on its base are four stone balls. This plinth is also
beautifully considered. It has gently ramped sides that rise to the small
plateau on which the sarcophagus sits – presumably to represent the ascent of
the soul – and at the base of each ramp is a small stone step. For whom was this
wonderful creation wrought? All is revealed by a bronze plate that remains fixed
to one side of the sarcophagus. The tomb commemorates William Allen, who died in
August 1762, his wife Elizabeth, who died in July 1751, and the Allens’
relatives through marriage, the Beazleys, the last of whom listed is Elizabeth
Beazley, who died in 1781. It looks far too pioneering to date from the early
1780s. More likely it came somewhat later, probably a little after 1800, and was
the work of Samuel Beazley – no doubt related to Elizabeth Beazley – who was an
architect, novelist and playwright in Regency London. Samuel Beazley, born 1786,
was one of the most famed and productive individuals in London theatre, writing
nearly a hundred plays and designing and enlarging a number of theatres,
including two notable structures of the 1830s: the long-lost neoclassical City
of London Theatre in Norton Folgate, Spitalfields, and the cast-iron Ionic
colonnade that still embellishes the Drury Lane Theatre in Covent Garden. When
he died in 1851, at Tonbridge Castle, Kent, Beazley was brought to Bermondsey
churchyard to be buried. Presumably he wanted to be near his family. Leave the
churchyard by the gate on Abbey Street, which runs perpendicular to Bermondsey
Street. You now stand opposite Bermondsey Square. Here once was the ‘Great
Close’, or inner court, of the late-eleventh-century Bermondsey Abbey. This
abbey, affiliated with the Benedictine Order and also known as the Cluniac
Priory of St Saviour, was, in its day, a place of high status: it was here Henry
II and Eleanor of Aquitaine held court in the Christmas of 1154, and where
Katherine de Valois – the widow of Henry V – lodged and died in June 1437. The
priory was closed during the Reformation in the 1530s, when Henry VIII granted
it to Sir Robert Southwell, a lawyer and one of the king’s able and ruthless
enforcers. Southwell soon turned the acquisition to profit by selling it on to
Sir Thomas Pope – a yeoman, lawyer and immensely wealthy court servant, perhaps
best remembered for founding Trinity College, Oxford. Pope used his new property
in Bermondsey to proclaim his status, and quickly pulled down the priory church
for materials to build a grand mansion for himself, which he called Bermondsey
House. But, ever the profiteer, Pope did not keep the house and land for long,
selling them back to Southwell who let them out to a rich City goldsmith. It’s a
tumultuous history, the only surviving hint of which is the fifteenth-century
tower of St Mary’s, which was once part of a church that served the priory’s
tenants. Bermondsey Square is now a rather strange and sad place, defined by
just a small group of early-Victorian houses huddled forlornly in its south-west
corner. Until ten years or so ago the square was a large and rugged open space
in which, each Friday morning, the Bermondsey antique market was held. This
picturesque affair moved to this site in 1950 from the Caledonia Road market in
Islington, soon becoming an institution famed among dealers, collectors and
enterprising tourists. Like many Londoners, I used to make a regular pilgrimage,
in the early hours of the morning, to the stalls and, by candlelight and torch,
found and bought some remarkable things, before retreating for breakfast in
traditional cafés in Long Lane or Bermondsey Street. This market is now almost
as distant a memory as the medieval priory buildings. Bermondsey Square has been
largely built upon, with seven-storey slabs of apartment blocks, hotel and chain
restaurants now laying their heavy and tiresome loads where an energetic and
charmingly anarchic market flourished only a few years ago. True, a
Friday-morning antique market does still take place, from around 4 a.m. – but on
a prim and presentable small parcel of land in the shadow of the modern
commercial buildings. There has been a recent attempt to reinvigorate the market
but it remains a shrunken affair that feels somewhat corporate, as if it were
laid on to entertain the tenants in the surrounding apartments. It is a succinct
distillation of what has become of Bermondsey Street since the Middle Ages:
first semi-rural idyll, then bustling hub of valuable but largely noisome
trades, and increasingly corporate and unaffordable property developments. As
you walk south-east from Bermondsey Square, you will notice a subtle change in
atmosphere. South Bermondsey is more tranquil than the frenetic buzz of the high
street. This is an area that gradually transformed from priory-owned farmland to
late-seventeenth- and eighteenth-century merchants’ domain to Victorian city
with houses and industry closely juxtaposed. The story is told by the gradually
evolving architecture we encounter in this portion of the walk. The resulting
area retains the ambience of a place distant from the city, in spite of its
proximity to central London. The tranquil feel of this portion of London has
ancient origins. As you follow the road leading from Bermondsey Square, crossing
Tower Bridge Road, you come on to Grange Walk. As its name suggests, this road
marks the route from the priory to its farms (or granges) to the south and east.
At the west end of this street, on its south side, is a small group of wonderful
houses, dating mainly from the seventeenth to very early eighteenth centuries.
Nothing quite like them survives in central London. They are a palimpsest of
medieval and late-Renaissance fabric: although little of the priory buildings
remains, ancient forms and functions are echoed in their current structures and
plans. Such curious groups of hybrids must once have been common within the
precincts of London’s dissolved monasteries, where medieval structures would
have been altered and retained in later buildings, but this one is now the best
by far to survive and offers a virtually unique glimpse of a lost London
vernacular architecture.

The group consists of seven houses, numbers 5–11 (continuous). All are
significantly different – reflecting their individual histories of growth – and
some, such as 10 and 11 and 6 and 7, are essentially pairs carved out of a
single structure. Number 5, three storeys high, is crowned by a large gable.
Above the front door is a narrow window, which is a common detail of the very
early eighteenth century, and probably lit a small closet. The twin-gabled
numbers 6 and 7 are more intriguing still, for they occupy a structure that is
presumed to incorporate part of the priory’s medieval gatehouse: on number 7 one
can still make out the bottom parts of a pair of pin-hinges, set one above the
other, marking the position of one leaf of a large gate. Numbers 5–7 are fronted
with skins of nineteenth-century stucco, which hide the evidence of their date.
But the peculiar window arrangement of numbers 6–7 gives it away: the single
first-floor window, along with the combined window and front door on number 7,
hints at centuries of gradual change, with the original fabric retained but
reused in strange and varied ways. Visually most satisfying are 8–11. All are
two-storey, although 8 is crowned by a wide gable and all retain brick fronts
that appear to date from the very late seventeenth or very early eighteenth
centuries. Number 9 is particularly good, with brick keystones on the
ground-floor windows, while number 8 has an intriguingly narrow window on the
first floor. And numbers 9 and 11 both retain doorcases with features typical of
the years around 1700, such as the bold pediments of segmental form, brackets
luxuriantly carved with flowers and acanthus leaves, which are in turn supported
by panelled pilasters. But look closely and you will see that little is quite
what it seems. Many elements are fairly new, mostly well done (with the
exception of the pediment on number 9 which is a beastly affair with mouldings
of incorrect profile and whole elements missing). These doorcases, like the
houses they adorn, are almost living things, with their flaws and omissions
being part of their remarkable and individual character. Our tour through the
history of domestic architecture continues a little further along Grange Walk,
at number 67. This structure reflects the transformation of the street from
rural farmland to prosperous merchants’ enclave, and likely dates to the decade
or so after 1715. The house is metropolitan in its architectural aspirations,
while most relaxed and rural in its composition. The brickwork, in particular,
is superb – look at the well-wrought segmental arches above the windows. Another
hint at the nature of early-Georgian Bermondsey stands opposite. The Bermondsey
United Charity School for Girls was a typical product of eighteenth-century
philanthropy. A charity school for poor local boys was started within the parish
of St Mary Magdalen in 1712, and enlarged to include girls in 1722. By 1819, the
Second Report of the Commissioners on the Education of the Poor would observe
that the school educated 220 boys and 130 girls – thirty of the girls ‘who best
deserved it’ were given clothes by the charity, too.13 The building that now
remains dates to 1830. The prim and proper classical frontage indicates the
affluence of the institution by that time. By then, the key and regular
contribution was from a charge on an estate on Grange Road. Like so much in
Bermondsey, it all came back to the leather industry: this estate was occupied
by prosperous ‘tan-yards’, part of whose annual rent supported the school. This
handsome schoolhouse must have done much to give the girls who attended it a
sense of pride and worth. The view along Page Walk. In the foreground, the
surviving portion of the Bricklayers Arms stable block; in the background,
housing for employees of the railway. Another hint of the ubiquity of the
leather trade sits round the corner on Grange Road, a little to the south of
Grange Walk. South Bermondsey never became as industrially vibrant as the high
street, but by the 1860s a number of factories had cropped up in this generally
residential area. The Alaska Factory, at number 61, was founded in 1869 to
process the hides of Alaska fur seals, one of which – carved in stone –
decorates the main gate. It’s a charming object, but with a face that looks
disconcertingly human. Through the gate stands one of London’s best-surviving
art deco factories, built for Martin’s, makers of leather clothes for aircrew in
the Second World War. The main architectural feature is the jazzy tower,
designed in the 1930s by Wallis, Gilbert and Partners, the British masters of
commercially glitzy art deco. The economy of this portion of Bermondsey was not,
however, based on leather alone. The proof stands 100 metres to the south, at
the intersection of Page’s Walk with Willow Walk. Here you can enjoy one of the
most sublime vistas of early-Victorian architecture still in existence: the
street is wide and the buildings low, and on the south side stands a long,
single-storey wall sporting wonderfully wrought brick arches. It is a surviving
part of a huge stable block, whose horses once helped move the freight kept in
Bricklayers Arms railway station. This station is one of the lost railway
wonders of Victorian London. It stood near the south-west end of Page’s Walk –
just off the Old Kent Road – and was constructed in the early 1840s as the
terminus for the South Eastern Railway Company and the London and Croydon
Railway Company, who did not want to pay their rival to use London Bridge.
Designed by Lewis Cubitt, who would later use a similar Italianate style at
King’s Cross, the station was a commercial disaster – it was too far from the
city centre, and embedded in an area that was rapidly becoming impoverished.
Within a few years the companies that had built it were incorporated with the
London and Greenwich Railway. In 1852 it closed for regular passenger use. But
this was not the end of the site’s railway history. Far from it. The terminus
continued to be used on special occasions, as captured by an amusingly effusive
1863 article, which describes the reception of the Prince of Wales and Alexandra
of Denmark in advance of their marriage at Windsor: ‘The station at the
Bricklayers Arms was a perfect marvel of magnificence. Wherever a garland or a
human being could be put they were there,’ reported the London Review. ‘We
should quite exceed our limit were we to attempt the faintest description of the
display of taste and beauty which was provided at this point for the reception
of the princess.’14 Through much of the late nineteenth century, the terminus
was used as one of the largest and most important railway goods yards in London.
It survived well into the twentieth century, with operations finally ceasing in
1981. Today, virtually all traces of it have gone – with the exception of a few
sandstone gate piers surviving in nearby Hendre Road, and the buildings in
Page’s Walk. For the most observant savants, though, there are a few suggestions
of the street’s railway history to be found in the terraced houses to the south.
The rail companies built these houses for employees and their families, and it
seems likely that Lewis Cubitt or his office produced the designs. They now give
the street much of its extraordinary character. The two terraces are
two-storeyed, uniform and handsome in a robust way; most sport gables that
express the structural form of their simple ‘butterfly’ roofs. The more
northerly terrace has doors paired below bold, Tuscan entablatures of almost
abstract form, while, in the terrace to the south, each front door is ornamented
with a row of large oblong blocks, or ‘dentils’, set below a cornice that is no
more than a slab of stone. All is very minimal and somewhat reminiscent of the
work of Nicholas Hawksmoor (see Walk 3), suggesting that the designer of this
group of buildings was enjoying his own mid-nineteenth-century Baroque revival.
It is only too tempting to let oneself get engulfed by the spirit of the
Victorian age. However, the street has one final surprise. At its junction with
Mandela Way you will stumble upon a Czech-made Russian T-34-85 tank. The gift of
a local resident, it is now treated as an art piece, and regularly repainted in
usually bizarre manner by diverse local artists. It’s an odd urban ornament, and
somewhat disconcerting if, like me, you first come upon it late at night, when
it happened to be painted pink and with its trunk-like barrel rising ominously
from the shadows. But in more sober moments, the tank – nicknamed ‘Stompie’ – is
a most moving object to contemplate; with its powerful 85mm gun, an improved
design of the first T-34 that was arguably integral to the Red Army’s victory on
the Eastern Front in 1944–5. It’s an idiosyncratic end to a walk through an
idiosyncratic part of London. One is never far from the legacy of leather in
Bermondsey, and the buildings and street names incessantly remind you of its
industrial past. And yet it is also a place of medieval architectural treats,
most decent cafés and pubs on and off Bermondsey Street, art deco towers,
long-abandoned railway stations and – of course – the odd tank. Between them
they create one of the most pleasingly eclectic districts of the capital.



