THE WALK
The first portion of this walk stretches from Shoreditch High Street overground
station to Brick Lane. We have been here before on Walk 2, into the City of
London. This time, though, our route is to the east - into territory that offers
an insight into the squalor of Spitalfields in the late nineteenth century.  It
wasn't always this way. When Spitalfields first started to expand at speed,
immediately after the Great Fire of London in 1666, much of the development took
place on land owned by the Wheler family; ultimately the Wheler estate would
stretch from what became known as Bethnal Green Road, to the east of Spital Yard
(later Spital Square) and then south to include the land on which Fournier
Street was constructed during the 1720s. Wheler Street - now renamed as
Braithwaite Street, the road Shoreditch High Street station opens on to - was
the most architecturally important and affluent thoroughfare.  It was in the
houses of these streets that the more prosperous families of the area chose to
live.  When waves of French Protestant Huguenots began to move to Spitalfields
in the 1680s, escaping Catholic persecution in their own land and at the hands
of their own king, Louis XIV, many of the most ambitious and successful settled
here. By the mid nineteenth century, however, all of this was a distant memory.
The street pattern was changed radically in this period, first by the
construction of the railway from 1839, and then by the imposition of Commercial
Street, a new thoroughfare, built from 1843-57, which as well as improving
communication also obliterated some of Spitalfields' most desperate slum streets
and courts.  Wheler/Braithwaite Street retains no physical relics of its opulent
seventeenth-century origins. Instead, the best buildings are Victorian. On the
south-west corner with Quaker Street is the red-brick and boldly gabled Bedford
Institute, built in a handsome early-seventeenth-century Flemish Renaissance style and named after a Quaker philanthropist. 

Built in 1893 - the date is shown in entwined numerals on the door-surround -
the institute housed, amongst various admirable activities, a working-men's club
and presumably did much to improve the impoverished lives of those who lived
around it.  Far jauntier is the Commercial Tavern, at the junction of
Wheler Street and Commercial Street. It was constructed in 1863 as part of the
healing process after Commercial Street had been sliced through the area and new
building plots had been created. It stands on an odd, wedge-shaped plot, but the
designer turned the problem to advantage by treating the wedge as an opportunity
to create a bulbous, bull-nosed building - its front tricked out with lovely
details - containing a well-windowed dining room on its first floor. This room
allowed diners to eniov a fine prospect of the new road and its teeming traffic,
as if it had been a canal in Venice.  Wheler Street also contains five fine
nineteenth-century cast-iron bollards, each with its own story to tell. One, a
splendid Gothic affair, has the letters MBS cast into its base, presumably
meaning the Metropolitan Borough of Stepney. The remaining four are of the more
familiar cannon form, three with a 'spur' casting at their base showing they
were designed to prevent loaded drays from wandering on to the pavement. One
proclaims on its shaft 'St Paul's Shadwell', and so presumably was part of a
paving scheme in the parish and was moved here at some later date. It also
records that it was cast in 1848 by Bailey Page & Co. of 81 Bankside. Another
states in large and beautiful serif lettering 'Dodgson London' - referring to
John Dodgson of Lower Shadwell, registered in the Post Office Directory of 1841
as an 'iron and brass founder'.  These bollards are lovely and strangely human
things - the small, domed tops of the cannon-type burnished by the posteriors of
generations of loiterers resting upon them, deciding whether to go this way or
that or simply going nowhere at all.   The route to take, though, is the thoroughfare that
intersects with Wheler Street. This is Ouaker Street. On the north side is a row
of gabled former railway warehouses dating from the late nineteenth century and
now gutted and being converted into an economy hotel; on the south side is an
early twentieth-century block of industrial dwellings, portions of the former
Truman's Brewery, and a large interwar public-housing block named Wheler House.
This block - standing in an open space and set back from the street - can be
quite a disturbing sight, with debris littering its forecourt and its balconies
bedecked with drying washing. It is at once a startling reminder of the poverty
and decay that made these streets notorious in the nineteenth century, and a
hint that, despite Spital-fields' renaissance as a residential area and a place
of en-tertainment, it also contains within it some of the poorest pockets of
East London.  In the late nineteenth century, the courts and alleys off the
south side of Quaker Street were among the worst the district had to offer. They
were, indeed, some of the darkest, most dire and most squalid buildings in the
city. In the preceding decades, the density of occupation had been increased,
with the construction of rows of cramped, ill-lit and tiny cottages in what were
once open courts, yards and even gardens. The result was a labyrinthine urban
grain, with secreted courts of tumbledown houses and of ancient large houses
subdivided and neglected. So naturally, when the political and social scientist
Friedrich Engels wanted to illustrate the desperate destitution of London's poor
in the 1840s, he turned to the courts off Quaker Street.  For Engels the poor
were the tragic victims of the ruthless and exploitative system of capitalism,
and in and around Spitalfields he found evidence to support his argument that in
Britain profit-driven entrepreneurs and industrialsts hastierred selish,
meterialst ardue- tive-were suffered to starve. In his The Condition of the
Working Class in England, published first in Germany in 1845, one of the most
powerful moments is the story of two boys who, in January 1844, had been brought
before the magistrate because being in a starving condition, they had stolen and
immediately devoured a half-cooked calf's foot from a shop. Upon investigating
further, the magistrate discovered how they lived at No. 2 Pool's Place, Quaker
Court off Quaker Street. A policeman found the mother with six of her children
literally huddled together in a little back room, with no furniture but two old
rush-bottomed chairs with the seats gone, a small table with two legs broken, a
broken cup, and a small dish. On the hearth was scarcely a spark of fire, and in
one corner lay as many old rags as would fill a woman's apron, which served the
whole family as a bed. For bed clothing they had only their scanty day clothing.
The poor woman told him she had been forced to sell her bedstead the year before
to buy food. Her bedding she had pawned with the victualler for food. In short,
everything had gone for food.g To push his point home, Engels quoted an article
from The Times of 12 October 1843: 'Let all men remember this -that within the
most courtly precincts of the richest city of God's earth, there may be found,
night after night, winter after winter, women ... ROTTING FROM FAMINE, FILTH,
AND DISEASE! He concluded with a call to arms: 'Let them remember this, and
learn not to theorize but to act. God knows, there is much room for action
nowa-davs. 10 It was an extraordinary image, and would have been unimaginable
just a century earlier, when these had been handsome streets that housed a
flourishing silk industry.


But, through the nineteenth century, this would be the impression of
Spitalfields that became embedded in the popular imagination. One of the most
vivid descriptions was produced in the late 1890s and came - as ever - from the
social reformer and philanthropist Charles Booth (see pp. 310, 361-2 and 386),
and his secretary George H. Duckworth. As we have seen, Booth colour-coded the
streets he saw to show the economic and social status of occupiers, ranging from
black for the very poor to yel-low/gold for the richest. Although flavoured by a
sense of compassion, his notes about Spitalfields are uncom-promising,
prejudiced and often scathing. New Square, off the south-west side of Quaker
Street, included 'Dogs chained to each garden, thieves'; Pool Square, meanwhile,
was notable for having 'rough women about, Irish, one house with wooden top
storey, windows broken' 11 They noted that this square should be dark blue on
the poverty map - almost the worst category.  One theme that emerges in many
accounts of nine-teenth-century Spitalfields is the territorialism. 'This is the
last of an Irish colony, the pair reported of Pool Square. 'The Jews begin to
predominate where Grey Eagle Street is reached!12 There were streets, courts and
small areas inhabited almost entirely by poor Jewish families of Polish and
Russian origin, mostly towards Whitechapel Road, whereas other areas were almost
exclusively occupied by poor Irish or poor English families.  These tended to
mix while the Jewish community nearly always remained separate. In this
particular case, Booth and Duckworth seem to have got it wrong: they say, in a
rather inflammatory manner, that the area around Quaker Street was being
transformed by an 'invasion of Jews' with 'small English colonies dotted
about'13 In fact, the census of 1891 reveals that the small cottages in these
courts remained the preserve of the English poor, with most of their inhabitants
born in or near the area.  Even more striking is the absence of the Huguenot
legacy from the census. Onlv a few of the names seem French. suggesting that by
the end of the nineteenth century the area's once dominant French communit was
but a distant memory, with its members having been almost overwhelmingly
assimilated or - more likely - had simply moved on.  Booth
and Duckworth also tell us a little about the lifestles of the inhabitants of
this area. In their concluding 'General Remarks', they characterised the courts
and streets lying south from Quaker Street and east from Commercial Street to
Brick Lane as 'a thoroughly vicious quarter', made worse by the Cambridge Music
Hall on Commercial Street - one of the largest music halls in London -which
'makes it a focusing point for prostitutes.  The music hall had been damaged by
fire in 1896, redesigned in exotic Moorish style by Harry Percival and reopened
in 1898- just in time for Booth and Duckworth to make their observations about
its evil influence - before ultimately being demolished in 1936, and replaced by
the bulky, tile-clad faintly art deco factory building that still stands on the
site.  What had happened to the once-proud weaving community of Spitalfields?
Clearly at some stage in the nineteenth century, something had gone badly wrong
for the well-to-do Huguenots of the district. The next portion of the walk
offers a few clues. Quaker Street emerges on to Brick Lane (which we will visit
later); continue straight on to Buxton Street, and you soon come to the grassy
plain of Allen Gardens, much beloved by the dog-owners of the area.  
It's now hard to believe, but the gardens
occupy what was Once The of the most important weaving areas in spitalfields.
Until the early 1960s, it retained a network of narrow cobbled streets, most
lined with two-storeyed weavers' cottages, furnished on their first floors with
wide weavers' windows. Indeed, until five or six years ago a significant number
of these cobbled streets survived, robbed of their houses but still carrying
with them evocative memories. Standing on these narrow stretches of
cobblestones, it was easy to conjure up the ghosts of their long-lost houses and
the lives lived within them. Sadly most were destroved a few years ago for the
construction of the overground railway, which rises here from below and in the
process slices diagonally through the route of what was Pedley Street.  The
history of these streets tells of the boom vears of the Spitalfields' silk
industrv as well as its decline. John Rocque's map of 1746 shows a short road
called Fleet Street which, along with other streets probing east from Brick
Lane, ended in market gardens and fields that marked the beginning of open
countryside. However, by the time of a map of 1799-1819 by Richard Horwood (see
p. 504), some of the market gardens around Fleet Street had been built upon.
Over the next twenty years or so, they disappeared under bricks and mortar and
from its eastern end Fleet Street was extended by the newly laid out Pedley
Street - created in a belated burst of optimism and growth that seems to have 
contradicted the long-term troubles besetting the local silk industry.



This transformation of Spitalfields from semi-rural idyll to urban sprawl
contributed to its subsequent transformation into a slum. As it became
increasingly distanced from healthy fields by the remorseless and mean eastward
expansion of London, the problems of poverty and overcrowding were greatly
multiplied. By the mid nineteenth century the lives of those who occupied the
small houses in these narrow streets was harsh, because the silk industry had
entered its years of final decline. In the mid 1860s, the writer Thomas Archer
summed up the problem: 'Unfortunately the cheapness of the French and German
silk and velvet which is now exported free of duty, and the operation of the
country factories as well as those of the large towns, have combined to reduce
the London weavers to a very deplorable condition.'14 The value of the industry
plummeted rapidly, and the wages of journevmen weavers with it.  The fate of the
weavers is well illustrated by one story of Pedley Street, commemorated by Henry
Mayhew. He quotes a weaver, Thomas Heath of 8 Pedley Street, who had given
evidence in 1839 to a government inquiry.  Heath, the inquiry said, had been
'represented by many persons as one of the most skilful workmen in Spital-fields
and had submitted a 'detailed account of his earnings during the last eight
years. This averaged out at about fifteen shillings a week. After expenses this
left Heath with an income of, on average, eleven shillings and sixpence a week.
His wife's earnings were three shillings a week. What struck Mayhew forcefully
was Heath's bitter and forlorn answer when asked if he had an children: 'No; I
had two, but they are both dead, thanks to God.  When asked why he was pleased
his children were dead, Heath replied that by their deaths he was 'relived from
the burden of maintaining them, and they, poor dear creatures, are relived from
the troubles of this mortal life'. Mayhew noted that if this was the feeling of
a skilled weaver, earning about three shillings a week above the average wage,
'what must be the condition of the weavers now [in the late 1840s] that wages
have fallen from fifteen to twenty percent since that period '15 Mayhew was
haunted by this desperate declaration, and so am I. Over the years I have tried
to work out where 8 Pedley Street stood, as if this would somehow bring me
nearer to Thomas Heath and hely me understand him better. Calculating the
house's location was easier before the overground railway was constructed, for
this now disturbs and destroys the ground by cutting through the former junction
between Fleet Street and Pedley Street.  I have, however, had better luck with
the 1841 census.  This is a notorious difficult document to use - house numbers
are not given, the method or order of listing the inhabitants of a street is
often not clear, and handwriting can be appalling and information sketchy. But
working my way through the entries for Pedley Street, in the parish of St
Matthew Bethnal Green, I found Thomas Heath, and what then remained of his
family.16 He was described as a weaver, aged forty-five, born in Middlesex.  He
lived with his wife Ann, aged thirty - and there were no children listed.
Documents like these paint a grim portrait of the life of the weavers in the
1840s. In the same house as Heath, which can only have been small, it seems
there were three other familv units and eleven people all in occupation on the
day of the census. What's more, the census shows that, in the adjacent group of
six small houses on Pedley Street, there were forty-nine people in occupation.
Add to this the number in the Heath residence and you get sixty inhabitants in a
row of seven adjoining houses, meaning that on average between eight or nine
people lived in each one. Of these sixty people, twenty-seven were involved in
the silk-weaving or fabric industry. It must have been a crowded and saualid
existence.  What was home life like for the last of the silk-weavers?  The
patterns of life were described by many people, often with very different
manners of expression. One of the more melodramatic accounts comes from Charles
Dick-ens, a London-obsessive and an uncontrollable romantic.  In 1851 he
interviewed a weaver who worked hard but lived a precarious existence, forever
subject to the fluctuations of the market that were way beyond his control, and
forever worried about the welfare of his familv. Dickens explored the weaver's
house, which quite possibly stood in or near Pedley Street, and observed that
the silk looms dominated the home so that the children sleep at night between
the legs of the monsters. Dickens also noted that weavers kept pigeons - birds
being the traditional pets of the weavers - and grew green runner beans.  He
ruminated that 'while birds could fly and escape, their owners could not. The
bean stalk allowed Jack to escape in the fairy tale but the "Jacks" of
Spitalfields will never, never, climb to where the giant keeps his money.17 A
far more detailed description was offered in the 1860s by Thomas Archer. He
wrote not just of weavers' houses and their garrets but also of the ornaments in
their homes, their characters and their hobbies. The weaver, noted Archer
requires a 'long light', or leaden casement, so that he most frequently occupies
garrets, originally designed for his trade. Poor, suffering, nearly starved, and
living in a house which shares with the rest the evils of bad or no drainage,
and insufficient water supply, his business requires at least some amount of
personal cleanliness, for the delicate fabrics on which he is employed could
never come out unsullied from the touch of coarser hands In these weavers'
houses, claimed Archer, 'the click of the shuttle may be heard all day long
while the weaver has work to do. Archer's description of a weaver's home is
particularly poignant: 'In one of these long "shops" a whole family and all
their live stock will sometimes live .. amidst the turned up stump bedsteads or
the roll of blankets on the floor. In their poverty Archer discerned a sense of
family pride and the distant memory of more prosperous times. Among 'the few
pieces of broken crockery, and the rickety furniture, some of which is
generations old, there is often seen some sort of order and decency which is
worthy of a better fortune.  ..a cracked china cup, an ivory carving, a
silver-keyed flute, a flawed and riveted punch-bowl... (or) a scrap or two of
old point lace.'18 The street life of this weaving district is even harder to
imagine today. Again, though, the historical record offers us a glimpse of what
has been lost. The Old Bailey's archive includes a description of a violent
robbery of September 1826. At about half past seven in the evening, a surgeon
named Henry Fuller was walking along Fleet Street Hill when he was attacked by a
gang of around twenty men. According to Fuller, when giving evidence in court
six weeks later, two of the men pinioned his arms while another fastened them to
his body by a rope. Fuller claimed that many brandished sticks to terrorise him
and one shouted, 'If the b-r speaks, knock his b-y brains out.' Fuller's pockets
were rifled, his surgical instruments grabbed and then he was released and the
gang ran off.  What happened next is in many ways more chilling, and certainly
very revealing. As Fuller explained in court, after being untied and as the gang
fled, 'I raised a cry of "Stop thief!" But nobody in the street responded or
picked up the cry. Eventually, 'Some persons came up and begged me to hold my
tongue, saying the gang was so desperate, they would murder me if I did not.'
Eventually four men were taken for the violent highway robbery' and tried at the
Old Bailey - three were acquitted for lack of evidence but one, the
eighteen-year-old James Bishop, was found guilty and hanged.1 These streets were
clearly lawless places, stalked by gangs that were bred out of the poverty and
unemployment of the collapsing silk industry.  

Today, the closest one can get physically to these old silk-weaving houses is by
walking to the very east end of Allen Gardens. Here are the best surviving
portions of early streets. with one cobbled section now serving as the entrance
to the adiacent and admirable Spitalfields City Farm. On this narrow street,
where weavers once walked, and on the sites of the small terraced houses in
which they toiled and starved, goats now frolic and prize pigs wallow in bucolic
splendour. The cobbled fragments include a portion of Weaver Street - which ran
south of and parallel to Pedley Street - and its junctions with Fleet Street
Hill and Bratley Street. These are the very corners on which unemploved and
desperate weavers must have gathered in the middle of the century to discuss
their plight and share their sorrows. In the mid nineteenth centurv Spitalfields was - as now - a place of opposing
worlds. Even while large parts of the area were beset by poverty and despair,
others were commercially vibrant, even prosperous, with their houses quite
well-occupied. Along and around Brick Lane were markets, shops, manufactories,
numerous pubs and, of course, the huge Truman, Hanbury and Buxton brewery.  This
is a side of Spitalfields that we next encounter.  Walk back via the north side
of Allen Gardens, and through the narrow alleyway that still, rather grandly,
calls itself Pedley Street. You come out on to Brick Lane.  This is an ancient
thoroughfare, and has existed with its modern name since at least 1550. On the
Agas map that shows London in c. 1560-70, Brick Lane is shown clearly, but is
unlined by buildings. In the early 1640s Brick Lane marked one of the boundaries
of the massive earth-built system of fortifications that Parliament rapidly
constructed around London. Like the Wheler estate to its west, it began to
develop in the late seventeenth century; by 1703, according to Joel Gascoyne's
map of Stepney, buildings lined virtually all of Brick Lane. This transformation
into urban area had - along with much of Spitalfields - been rapid, almost
shockingly so. In his Tour Thro' the Whole Island of Great Britain, published in
three volumes between 1724 and 1727. Daniel Defoe remarked that, 'Within the
memory of the writer hereof, all those numberless ranges of building, called
Spittle Fields ... are all now close built, and well inhabited with an infinite
number of people.' Lanes that were 'deep, dirty and un-frequented' were now part
of the city, and this included 'Brick Lane, which is now a long well paved
street" though it was formerly but 'a deep dirty road, frequented chiefly by
carts fetching bricks that way into White-Chapel from Brick kilns in those
fields, and had its name on that account 20 The Brick Lane before us now
possesses some physical reminders of this early development, but mostly it
reflects the vibrant late-eighteenth- and nineteenth-century life of the area.
Most notable is the mighty bulk of the former Truman's Brewery that stands
astride the central portion of Brick Lane. Truman's was, in the mid eighteenth
century, one of the largest and most modern industrial complexes in the world,
and it determined much of the physical character of the north-east portion of
Spitalfields well into the late twentieth century. It was closed as a brewery in
1989, but the commercial, retail and leisure uses to which its retained
buildings are currently put remain a major influence on life in Spitalfields.
But we walk north, towards the railway bridge. The character of this portion of
Brick Lane was recast during the 1830s - and after - by the arrival of the
railways. You may have noticed a small, graffiti-covered brick building on
Pedley Street; this was Shoreditch station, built in 1876 to serve the
Underground system's East London Line. The little station, perched above a track
in the deep cutting below, closed in 2006 having been made redundant by the
overground line that now sails majestically above it, to the north. The railway
bridge across Brick Lane, incorporating a vast lattice-steel viaduct to its
east, carries the overground railway to Shoreditch High Street station. The
really significant railway works, however, lie just to the south of this bridge
and run, generally out of sight, below ground level. This is the main route into
Liverpool Street station from Cambridge and Norwich which, when being
constructed in the later nineteenth century, wrought much havoc in this part of
Spitalfields.  Take a look to the west, just before the bridge is reached.
Here, behind a pair of huge gates, is a now-secret treasure trove of industrial
architecture and archaeology that stretches as far as Wheler Street. This is the
brick-vaulted underworld - with cobbled streets and cavernous arched rooms - of
the now long-lost Bishopsgate Goodsyard.  The ranges of once towering warehouses
are now gone and all stands derelict, the subject of a series of much-contested
proposals from developers to bedeck all with a number of residential towers. The
existing structure incorporates portions of the original viaduct - dating from
1838-40 and designed by the pioneering railway engineer John Braithwaite. This
viaduct, which originally led to Bishopsgate railway station on Norton Folgate,
is a listed building so it, at least, should survive whatever scheme finally
wins consent. The redundant rail track above your head is supported by brick
piers of vast girth which allow only a little light to filter into this
seemingly subterranean world. The tough materials and robust brick and stone
construction, the rich and wild planting cascading from above, gives it the feel
of an antique ruin, like Trajan's Market in Rome. About ten years ago all of
this was opened for the public's pleasure but then closed again. Such are the
strange ways and vagaries of urban development.


Immediately to the north-east of the bridge is a small road, its south side now
mostly occupied by the vast latticework steel viaduct of the overground railway.
This was the long, once-important and well-occupied St John's Street, which was
laid out in the seventeenth century and is recorded in all its splendour on
Gascovne's 1703 map of Stepney. It must have been an attractive street, lined
with the late-seventeenth-century homes of Huguenots, perhaps even the grand
homes of leading master weavers, since one of the area's most important Huguenot
churches or 'temples' was set within a court on its north side. The street
terminated with the pleasant walks of 'Hambleton's Garden', with fields beyond.
This idyllic world, or rather what survived of it, was shattered when the
railway arrived and most of the south side and east end of the street
disappeared first below the raised viaduct and then was obliterated by the
later, wider cutting. And most of what was built in place of the lost houses was
in turn destroyed a few years ago for the viaduct. Now this once-grand street is
now no more than the runt of a turning, seemingly heading nowhere. For some not
very clear reason its name has been changed to Grimsby Street - perhaps so as
not to sully the memory of St John.  The next junction, virtually a crossroads
formed by Sclater Street coming in from the west and Cheshire Street from the
east, is one of the most important and memory-charged places in Spitalfields -
at least for those whose memory of the area stretches back for a few decades.
This was the meeting place of Spitalfields' great and famous outdoor Sunday
markets. Thirty years ago the markets were thriving affairs, hubs of East End
life, selling all manner of wares - from cut-prices clothes and puppy dogs to
old furniture and the accumulated contents of many a local attic or cupboard. It
was truly amazing. All you had to do was wish to find something and, if you kept
your focus, you usually would - with a lot of surprises thrown in. Now these
markets are but sad shadows, although the north end of Brick Lane still puts on
a reasonable showing on a Sunday morning, with street stalls selling more than
cheap food and modern tat.  This junction also marks the nucleus of Brick Lane's
few surviving early houses, shops and workshops. Particularly good are 125 and
127 Brick Lane, built on the corner with Sclater Street in 1778 for a Huguenot
named Daniel Delacourt and with wide workshop windows. There was a sensational
terrace of similarly wide-windowed weavers' houses on the south side of Sclater
Street. They were built in the early 1720s, became derelict and were destroyed
in the early 1970s without even a whimper. This pointless destruction - their
site remains empty - was a most significant step in the fightback to save the
historic fabric, and life, of Spitalfields: a fight that has been sustained for
over forty years with grim determination by succeeding waves of residents.  At
the west end of Sclater Street, where it faces Club Row to the north across
Bethnal Green Road, was the once-famed Club Row animal and bird market. It was
one of the sights of nineteenth-century London and it seemed to attract and yet
repulse in fairly equal measure.  There are some memorable descriptions. Thomas
Archer, writing in the mid 1860s, is particularly good because he seems to have
spent some time in the area, observing 'the bird, dog, and pigeon-fanciers'.
They came, he says, 'from the marshes, or from still further afield, where they
have been pegging for chaffinches, or jingling robins, or netting larks.21
Archer writes evocatively on the character and the extravagant appearance of
these bird fanciers, who were perhaps part of London's mid-Victorian gang life:
'shambling, tight trousered, sleek haired, artful, he says, 'they are in the
long run more ... dangerous than either thief or convict. 22 Archer also noted
the more 'reg-ular thieves' who were attracted to Club Row on market day: 'I
have counted eleven as I stand here by the corner, and I know that I am the
cause of their uneasy shifting hither and thither, and that they are watching me
as closely as I am looking at them.23 Thirty years later, Charles Booth, too,
had much to say about the animal and bird market: during a walk on 22 March
1898, he noted that it was a 'centre to bird fanciers' dealing in larks,
thrushes, canaries, parrots'; they were often placed in 'small square cages
wrapped up in pocket handkerchiefs outside windows', which supposedly allowed
'new birds to pick up the right note from their fellows'. 24